1984.6

Deep Ecology Disentangled

Arne Naess

1. Pluralism. The four levels of deep ecology 2

2. Complete understanding of our neighbor's philosophy

is unnecessary 3

3. The importance of shallow arguments with a total deep

ecology argumentation 4

4. The non-existence of shallow philosophies 5

5. A useless term: 'shallow ecologist' 6

6. An unfortunate term: 'egalitarianism'? - the right

to live 6 7. Can we let rivers live? A question of semantics or

of metaphysics? 7

8. Deep ecology within a rationalist framework 9

1.Pluralism. The four levels of deep ecology

Professor Richard Sylvan's transcript (Sylvan 1984), with this title
minus the question mark, is an unusually pains-taking critical
examination of deep ecology from one of its prominent supporters. In
what follows I shall select some of its topics for discussion.

The author carries out a double task well adapted to the pluralist
character of deep ecology. On the one hand he argues for his own special
version, on the other hand he accepts the coexistence of other versions,
in part incompatiable or at least significantly different, from his own.
As could have been expected, the other verions he examines are subjected
to critical remarks. He tries to 'disentangle' the adequate from the
inadequate as seen from what he takes to be 'the core' of deep ecology:
roughly the value in itself of many natural items, living and not
living, apart from humans.

'Core' is a good expression for what George Sessions and I recently
formulated as an ecology movement platform or set of principles (Naess
and Sessions 1984) and also for what I formulated as the 18 points of
key terms in Naess 1973.

A model of the kind of reasoning going on within the movement was
pictured in Naess and Sessions 1984 by means of a diagram showing four
levels.

Level 1: A level of fundamental philosophical or religious views.

Level 2: Basic deep ecology views derived from Level 1.

Level 3: More or less special views derived from Level 2.

Level 4: Particular norms and decisions in particular

situations derived from Level 3 views.

'Derived from' is not to be read as 'derived only from', because
hypotheses of various kinds must be added all the way from Level 1 to
Level 4. The diagrammatical presentation does not illustrate the
psychological or social genesis of the views of the various levels.

The pluralist character of the views of supporters of the deep ecology
movement is, in terms of the diagram, primarily plurality of views of
Level 1. The most exuberant flora of philosophies and religions are
represented, and also a variety of uses of language - poetic,
mythological, Heideggerian, scientific or pseudoscientific, etc.

Levels 3 and 4 also show diversity, in part incompatible, views, for
instance, concerning vegetarianism. Characteristic of the movement is,
however, an attitude of 'live and let live' which extends to mild
internal (in-group) disagreements. 'Let there be no apostolic answers by
a green priesthood!' (Non-leader Komsi of the Finnish green non-party.)

Proposals concerning Level 2 are proposals about how to formulate rather
basic views which the supporters have more or less in common. Diversity
of terminology is natural and inevitable, but not significantly
disagreement in substance. Anyhow, the life of the movement is largely
independent of whether professional philosophers agree or disagree about

formulations at Level 2.

2.Complete understanding of our neighbors' philosophy is unnecessary

Sylvan is critical of some features of the above exposition.

  But, for reasons we shall come to later, such theoretical frameworks
  as ecosophy, pantheism, Christianity and Buddhism do not include
  thorough-going deep positions, but sustain rather intermediate
  positions, and a properly deep picture is not derivable from them.
  This suggests that the whole derivational pyramid presented by Naess
  is substantially astray; its success would depend upon importing
  analogues of shallowness into deep ecology, so it will be argued.

Even if the four kinds of framework mentioned by Sylvan were thoroughly
unsuited for derivation of a deep ecology platform, he would accept that
there is at least one philosophical framework which is suitable. What I
cannot give up is that adequate articulation of a deep ecology position
must by definition include fundamental views - basic assumptions or
premises corresponding to vigorous basic attitudes of supporters of the
movement. Personally I find that at least three of the four frameworks
are already represented within the deep movement. In Christian
Scandinavian professional theology I could mention the positions of
Gunnar Breivik and of Ole Jensen.

Among the philosophies Sylvan thinks incapable of generating a deep
ecology position is my ecosophy T with 'self-realization' as a key term
at Level 1. When proposed at the Future Research Conference in Bucaresti
in 1972, Professor Maruyama immediately objected in about the same way
as Sylvan does, and they are not alone in this.

  The whole systemic framework, especially that of maximizing a
  (quasi-measurable) objective function is pass√©, old dominant paradigm
  stuff, out of keeping with an alternative environmental paradigm.

They are to some degree right as regards the style, but the objections
are mainly due, I think, to insufficient consideration of the semantics
(Naess 1981), methodology (Naess 1977) and systems theory (Naess 1964)
implied in my favorite pyramid-version of ecosophy T. My last words in
this debate are always: "Why object to ecosophy T if you have your own
philosophy from which you generate the (core) position of deep ecology?"
If a kind of exposition requires too much agreement in too many fields
(semantics, methodology,...) in order to understand the intention of the
author - leave it alone. There are Buddhist and Heideggerian expositions
I respect but clearly understand rather inadequately. This does not hurt
the movement. We would die long before we would complete a program to
adequately understand the expositions of all philosophical and religious
views 'behind' a deep ecology platform.

In the remarks by Sylvan which perhaps indicate how he would describe
his ecophilosophy, the key term 'value' carries a heavy burden. A
systematization of levels of value priorities seems to be implied. If a
definite kind of value is not given top priority, but there is a
'democracy' of, let us say, 10 kinds,it is interesting to see which kind
of rules (norms!) are available in cases of value collisions among the
10. What I insinuate is that there is no philosophical 'safety in
numbers'. To have only one value or norm at the summit seems atrocious,
but to have 10 does not make it easier. What I am driving at is only the
suggestion that, whatever the kind of philosophical underpinning of a
deep ecology platform, it will meet great difficulties and scarcely
deserves general accep-tance.

3.The importance of shallow arguments within a total deep ecology
argumentation

It is deplorable that my expositions can give the impression sometimes
that "there is really no rift between shallow and deep ecology". (Sylvan
1984, p.35) Perhaps it is due to the (to me rather obvious) position
that shallow arugments are completely compatible with deep ecology as an
explicitly stated general view. A typical kind of example: so- and-so
argues that the decision D should be adopted, and offers an argument
starting at the deepest level. (Level 1). The argument carries little
weight with people in power, so he also offers a different argument
which he believes is tenable. It concerns solely the health of people in
the near future. No larger or deeper perspective. People in power take
notice. They consider making decision D - on the basis of shallow
arguments put forward by a supporter of deep ecology. - The important
World Conservation Strategy is full of analogous examples. Quite
different is the case in which so and so in public consistently hides
his or her adherence to a deep argument. There may be understandable
tactical or personal reasons for this, but it does not support the deep
ecology movement. It is one of the major programs in the next years to
convince 'experts' who believe in a deep ecology position that they
should admit it in public. It may temporarily reduce confidence in their
objectivity and scientific status, but scarcely in the long run. And the
public must not get the impression that only soft heads and romantics
believe in the tenability of other arguments than the shallower ones. (I
use here the comparative 'shallower' rather than 'shallow' in accordance
with Sylvan's proposal to split the not-deep kinds of positions in two,
the shallow and the intermediate.)

In conclusion, what I recommend is that experts whose opinion is that of
the kind (A):

(A) The decision D is deeply bad, and D is even bad from a shallow point
of view

do express themselves in this way rather than in the more simple ways
(B) and (C):

(B) The decision D is bad from a deep point of view.

(C) The decision D is bad from a shallow point of view.

The recommendation is, as far as I can see, compatible with the useful
analysis by Sylvan 1983, p.260 et seq.

4.The non-existence of shallow philosophies

It is a frequent but in my view unconfirmed assumption that supporters
of deep ecology have opponents with a different philosophy, a philosophy
or religion from which they explicitly and with care derive support for
shallow positions and arguments against the deep. At least I do not know
of any such philosophy or religion. As an empirical hypothesis I venture
to predict that there will be none.

People making decisions upholding or perpetuating those current
relations man/nature which supporters of deep ecology deem unjustiable
or even self-destructive point to political and other restraints
operating at the moment and in the particular kind of situation they
find themselves. They do not argue explicitly and with care from
philosophical or religious foundations. It seems to me that people in
power who are willing to answer the questions supporters of deep ecology
pose find it difficult not to move far in the direction of deep
positions. This is of great importance for the movement. It undermines
the destructive decisions by more or less open admissions that these are
ad hoc, expedient, opportunistic, and made because of the many
undesirable traits of the current political and economic situation.

In the early 70s I predicted that a 'green party' would influence the
non-green parties to adopt even more anti-green positions than they
normally have. But it has worked the other way. They do not fight deep
ecology principles, but continue to make anti-green decisions. Perhaps a
little less rigorously and with less confidence.

The deep ecology position cannot, of course, be defined as a position
due to or consisting of deep questioning. (The otherwise excellent
account by S.Bodian of my position makes such an interpretation
possible.) But it is of importance in environmental conflicts that deep
questioning of 'the present dominating paradigm' (Sylvan's phrase)
unerringly reveals the lack of a rival philosophy or religion to those
of the supporters of the deep ecology movement. From the point of view
of extension rather than intension 'x is a philosophy from which a deep
ecology platform is derived' is therefore extensively equivalent with 'x
is an environmental philosophy answering (systematically) relevant deep
questioning of the present dominating paradigm'.

But it is not adequate to say that dominant man/nature policies are
colored by the philosophy of utilitarianism? I think it is highly
misleading. At best it is an excusable euphemism. Less inadequately one
may say that the policies are colored by narrow, short-range,
considerations of utility for subgroups within mankind. There is no need
for a philosophy to implement such policies. If attempts were made to
derive them from a philosophy of utilitarianism the very process of
theoretical clarfication of the policies and their relations to levels
of happiness or other criteria of utilitarianism would undermine them.

Attempts to carefully articulate general goals of, for instance,
Scandinavian social democracy, have so far not gone beyond the level of
expressions like 'Absence of (more than a certain seasonal)
unemployment', 'Job security', 'stable price levels'. Recently 'the
right to have a cabin along fjords or in the mountains' has been
proposed by the Norwegian Labor Party! It is a common view among people
having current political life in industrial societies under close
obervation that whatever party is in power, or has the prospect of being
in power, there is not much difference in policies capable of being
carried out. The freedom of political manoeuvre today is extraordinarily
limited.

A real break with dominating policies in relations to nature seems to be
impossible, given the existing complex of pressure groups and the
traditionally very limited perspective in time and space. A deep change
must, I think, be made possible through the strong action of groups with
strong beliefs and are willing to give up the usual political awards
like higher salaries and more power over others. The deep ecology
movement furnishes one such group. It occupies a central place in a
Scandinavian 'Alternative Future'-project. It will not succeed if it is
not by people with strong motivation and able to argue from deep
premises.

5.A useless term: 'shallow ecologist'

Those responsible for the continuation of the dominance of shallow
argumentation are, as mentioned in most cases, trapped in a difficult
situation where alternatives are few and the constraints many. This is
one of the reasons to avoid letting strong criticism of policies spill
over and be directed against people. Expressions such as 'shallow
ecologist' should perhaps be avoided. The same applies to 'shallow
friend', 'shallow people'. (Sylvan (1984, pp.35-36) does not seem to
find them altogether obnoxious.)

6. An unfortunate term: 'egalitarianism'? - The right to live

According to the Naess-Sessions deep ecology platform, all living beings
share a right to live and blossom. It is therefore independent of how
many there are of any particular specimen at any particular time or
location. The principle was given the solemn name 'biospherical
egalitarianism in principle'. Seeing the misunderstandings and also how
many people have (for political reasons?) a rather ambivalent attitude
towards the term itself, I soon proposed to eliminate it. It might be
called 'the equal right maxim'. By a large section of the Scandinavian
peoples it seems either to be intuitively accepted or to be derived from
the acceptance that each creature has its ordained place to fill in the
universe. Having that place to fill, it has some kind of right to live
and blossom. The crux of the matter is that the place is ordained.

The largely unformulated value defining principles proposed by Sylvan
seem to lead to views - or perhaps it is only a terminology? - which are
unacceptable to me:

  It is not even obvious that something has value by virtue of having
  life. On the contrary, value seems, like yellowness, to be much more
  patchily distributed across the universe, and not always distributed
  on living things, for example things in excess, such as locusts or
  rats in a plague.

The position that living beings, for instance humans or locusts, have no
value if "in excess" (Sylvan 1984, p.11) seems just as unacceptable or
even more so than the position that they do not have in principle the
same non-quantifiable right to live and flourish. The value terminology
cannot in my view replace the rights terminology. ('The value to live
and blossom' or similar expressions are awkward,to say the least.) The
terminology of rights of animals, and even of plants, is firmly rooted
in Scandinavian ordinary language, and I suspect the same holds true of
the English. No philosopher has in my opinion been able to give any
decisive arguments against the use of the term 'right'. But some
certainly have pointed out its problematic character when analysed with
great care. Therefore I prefer the kind of phrase 'If there are rights,
then...'. Or: 'if the term "rights of man" is accepted as meaningful,
then...'.

7.Can we let rivers live? A question of semantics or of metaphysics?

Key terms and sentences of a philosophy or, perhaps even more so, of a
social movement, are notoriously vague and ambiguous. When we see a text
as a vehicle of communication, a set of significantly different
interpretations are normally represented within the total group of
people reached through the communication. Roughly, in sociological
jargon, they fall into the in-group and the out-group, and it is on the
whole a function of the in-group to look for interpretations making the
declarative sentences of the text tenable, a function of the out-group
to look for interpretations which make them untenable or meaningless.
The neutral observer is given the function of listing plausible
interpretations and if he or she takes a stand, to offer if-sentences:
if so-and-so is meant, then the sentence so-and-so is tenable, if
otherwise, untenable.

Within the deep ecology movement, many important terms and sentences
have come to the attention of the public during intense conflicts. They
have the function of slogans (battle or rallying cries) and maxims, but
this does not rule out their adequacy in non-propagandistic texts. Let
us inspect an example, 'Let the river live!', as used in a campaign in
Arctic Norway (Alta). The term 'river' in such a sentence does not of
course connote water-molecules or a riverbed, but a gestalt formed by
the synthesis of many elements such as 'the river' in a narrow sense,
life forms in the river, the landscape along the river and the uses of
the river by people who do not destroy. After the great communicational
success of this rallying cry, probably due in part to its rather
comprehensive character, sentences of the kind 'Let x live!' were soon
seen in the propaganda and advertising of the most different kinds.
Thanks to the many and wide uses of 'live' and 'life' in the vernacular,
the potential range of x was wide.

The example furnishes an introduction to the question whether maxim 1 in
the Naess-Sessions proposal is too narrow, a point of view defended by
Sylvan.

(1) The flourishing of human and non-human life on Earth has value in
itself (synonyms: intrinsic value, inherent value).

Considering the broad uses of the term 'life' - uses which today are
very much alive - I do not think the formulation leads to the grand
misunderstanding that we should not take care of mountains or deep
caves. Spiders have their habitat on Sagarmati (Mount Everest), and -
presumably less high ones - belong to the mountain goats according to
the Bible. Many who would not deny that mountains have value in
themselves, would nevertheless be somewhat pensive when asked whether
they would assert it. The comments to maxim 1 mentions that a
comprehensive use of 'life' is made use of, but the comments should have
added that the principle is not meant to exclude some classes of beings
which are not alive even in very broad senses of life. Which classes?
Here the principle of ecophilosophical pluralism enters. There is no
reason to seek agreement on this point in the movement.

For some of those who work on reconstruction of Spinoza's Ethics, res
singulares (or particulares) make up the class of beings maxim 1 refers
to. They are the class of beings which amor intellectualis Dei (sive
Natura) applies to. But of course most supporters of the deep ecology
movement may find it not worth their effort to reconstruct in Spinoza's
work.

Sylvan thinks that the Naess-Sessions use of the term 'life' stretches
it 'beyond its ordinary biological use" (Sylvan 1984, p.14).

  But a convincing theory had better not be built only on metaphysical
  assignment of value to inanimate things or by appeal to dubious
  discredited mythologies of other cultures to which natural things are
  (considered) alive. For one thing, this looks too like the
  anthropocentricism that biocentricism is supposed to be a major leap
  beyond: and indeed many of the mythologies that bring out the river as
  alive are of this anthropocentric type. The river is alive because of
  the river god or river nymphs or like (nonexistent) projections of
  humans.

Three objections I find justified at this point: the platform
formulations and the comment to them should not amount to theory. They
are from the point of view of purely cognitive communication starting
points ('T‚ÇÄ-formulations, Naess 1981) of efforts at 'precization'
leading to the incorporation in definite purely conceptual frameworks.
Secondly, the latent cognitive function of mythologies is separable from
the surface cognitive interpretation in terms of "gods, nymphs", etc.
Many of us who are inspired by

contemporary cultural anthropology are impressed by how myths very often
have ecological functions. Thirdly, the broad uses of 'to live' in 'let
the river live!' among Marxist, Christian and other activists have
scarcely any metaphysical or mythological import.

8.Deep ecology within a rationalist framework

The quotation from Sylvan at this point is important in part because it
reflects a kind of 'critical rationalism' which certainly should at
least formulate a deep ecology platform different from that of
Naess-Sessions.

  Deep ecology exponents have thought that they needed to venture out to
  strange, esoteric or old-fashioned metaphysical and epistemic themes
  to support deep ecology. They don't. Rather ordinary systems theory
  will serve, among other methods.

I think many of us would like to see a proposal based on "ordinary"
systems theory.

When working on Spinoza,it is easy to feel old-fashioned, and it may
turn out to be a blind alley. But it is motivated by feeling at home
with Spinoza and trusting his intuitions. Others who feel at home in
strange philosophic traditions may also have the same frame of mind.
What ordinary, i.e. scientific, systems theory as opposed to
philosophical systems theory can offer will, I hope, soon be seen. We
certainly need every effort at clarification. When trying to apply
precise scientific methods where others rely on more murky philosophical
insights, it is natural to be impatient with slogans. After objecting to
a tendency to assume that "what is natural, is, by and large, good",
Sylvan describes as "even worse" "the tendency to personify Nature, as
in Commoner's dubious "law", Nature knows best. Nature, since not a
creature with intentions, cannot (significantly) know anything". (Sylvan
1984, p.37).

As a slogan I think Commoner's is very good. A little nature
personification cannot do much harm late in this century. Sylvan's nore
scientific alternative has scarcely the same appel: "following natural
ways tends to give better results than alternatives".

So much about points in Sylvan's exposition which I think need further
discussion. I shall not comment on the many points where I tend simply
to nod appreciatively.

References

Bodian, S., "Simple in means, rich in ends: a conversation with Arne
Naess". in Ten Directions, 1982, 3(2): 7. 10-12.

Naess,A., 1964, "Reflections about total views", Philosophy and
phenomonelogical Research, 25, 16-29.

Naess, A., 1973, "The shallow and the deep, long-range ecology movement.
A summary". Inquiry, 16:95-100.

Naess, A., 1977, "Notes on the methodology of normativve systems", in
Methodology and Science, 10:64-79.

Naess, A., 1981, Communication and Argument, Oslo University Press.

Naess, A., and G.Sessions, 1984, "A deep ecology platform" in
Ecophilosophy, 6, Philosophy Department, Sierra College, Rocklin, CA
95627, USA.

Routley, Richard (=R.Sylvan), 1982 and 1983, "Roles and Limits of
Paradigms in Environmental Thought and Action", Discussion Papers in
Environmental Philosophy, No.1, Department of Philosophy, Research
School of Social Sciences, Australian National University.

also in:

Robert Elliot and Arran Gare, editors, Environmental Philosophy: a
collection of readings, University of Queensland Press, 1983, p.260 et
seq.

Sylvan, Richard, 1984, "Deep Ecology Disentangled", Rough Draft,
October, 1984. The draft was revised and got the title 'A Critique of
Deep Ecology'. The revision does not, I think, touch what I have said in
the present paper.
