1988Ã˜

Green politics, green parties, deep ecology. How related?

Arne Naess

1.The place of politics in surveys of the deep ecology movement

In any social movement slogans play an important, mainly conative, role.
Attempts to clarify their cognitive functin play a subordinate role, but
one that should not be neglected. Short summaries of positions and short
surveys using some of the expressions of the slogans also play a role,
and I shall here discuss a few of them.[1]

From its very beginning the long-range deep ecology movement included a
political aspect. The fight against irresponsible use of pesticides in
the early 60s was political, involving questions of legislation. We may
therefore speak of 'the politics of the deep ecology movement'. It may
be defined simply as the politics intended to contribute to the
realization of the goals of the movement. But there are conceptual
complications.

As short hand for the 'deep ecology movement' or for 'ecosophy' or for
both, the connotation of 'deep ecology' has a political component.[2]
One may talk about (a) the kind of politics favored by most of the
supporters of deep ecology, or, more narrowly, about (b) those of their
political views which intimately depend upon the essential traits of
their deep ecology.

What Alan Drengson has in mind when he talks about 'eco-politics' is
closely related to this narrower concept:

  "...ecopolitics involves the range of considerations that connet
  self-realization, community participation, bioregionalism, appropriate
  technology, humanistic psychology, environmental ethics, and a new
  ecological metaphysics and ontology. ..."

In the 20s, 30s, 40s and 50s isolated writers and public-speakers,
engineers and scientists, tried to awaken the general public about
mankind's disastrous, immoral and self-destructive interference in
natural processes. More or less completely in vain! Then rather
suddenly, these concerned individuals and their small following, got
heard. Millions acknowledged their joy and relief: they understood
better their basic, unconscious and so far unarticulated respect and
concern for the Earth. Their enthusiasm and optimism were contagious:
now things would change, completely new policies would emerge, led by
'friends of the Earth'.

It all started in the USA, but it inspired Europeans, 'the greens'. In
Continental Europe the ecology movement appeared as part of
anti-establishment social and political phenomena such as a renewed
anarchist movement.

The relation of the politics of the German greens to the politics of the
ecology movement, deep or shallow, is somewhat complicated. In the 70s
the opinion in Europe tended to be critical of the greens' counterparts
in the United States. They were said to concentrate too much on three
aspects, the 'spiritual', the 'lifestyle', and life in small alternative
communities. The critique is, as far as I can see, only partly
justified. But in Germany and Scandinavia political aspects were
central, including political philosophy.

Of the four well-known key terms (or watchwords) of the German greens,
only one relates directly to ecology. In Scandinavia the philosophical
aspect, with ecophilosophy as a key term, was added.

What Johan Galtung terms "The Green Movement" is characterized,
tentatively of course - through 20 "policies" or in its opposition to
"mainstream characteristics"[3] Only one of the policies relates
directly to the man/nature relation-

ship: "ecological balance Person-Nature; building diversity, symbolism;
complete or partial vegetarianism". The mainstream policy according to
his two-page survey is at this point characterized by the expression
"exploitation of nature". The policies characteristics of deep proposals
within the deep ecology movement in the 70s both in Europe and the
United States had of course a larger percent of (directly)
ecology-related points.

A lengthy survey, 'the 18 points survey' was extensively used by me in
Scandinavia. Discussing the policies proposed for the 1990s it is useful
to consider which points proposed in the 70s and 80s ought to be
reformulated or left out, and which new ones ought to be considered. I
shall therefore quote the '18-point key term survey' in extenso in spite
of its length. Each point contains several key expressions. After 5
years of use I said that it only "hints at" the basis of the vast deep
ecology movement.[4] Why just hint? The tremendous complexity of the
ecological crisis should make us abstain from every kind of dogmatism.
We must be prepared to shift again and again our attention and to hail
widely different directions of attack.

Bennett and Sylvan express reservations:[5]

  "The ecological movement of Green Politics may not go very deep; it
  may only be based upon reform environmentalism (or shallow ecology as
  it used to be called), which aims to reform some of the worst abuses
  and excesses of the dominant position, such as gross pollution,
  extensive despoilation of land and lakes and oceans, little thought
  for the future, mistreatment of animals, etc."

In terms of the fours levels (p.226 in Deep Ecology), this means that
the ecological component of a green party may lack a philosophical or
religious underpinning - lack of level 1. The political platform in
general, or of a particular party, may have components corresponding to
level 2. It will contain a point saying roughly the same as point 5 of
the 8 points: human interference of the non-human world is excessive and
the situation is rapidly worsening. The usual technocratic optimism will
be lacking. Personally I expect green politics will on the whole use
more of the deep ecological key terms and concepts in the 90s. Worsening
conditions will call for radical thinking.

2.the 18 Point Survey

1. Pollution. The fight has begun, but in part by means of
resource-demanding production e.g. purification plants. The number of
plant and animal species which are yearly extermin-

ated by pollution is estimated (in 1972) to be somewhere between 50 and
several hundred. The long term effects of this devastation is largely
unknown. (Compare point 18).

2. Resource management and resource distribution. What has earlier been
called "aid for underdeveloped countries" now appears, on occasion, to
be a question of fair resource distribution, and compensation to the
poor countries for the material and immaterial benefits of which they
have earlier been deprived by the rich. The struggle against
"future-imperialism": our present resource consumption determines and
limits future generations, etc., perhaps two hundred years in the case
of oil. - Resource distribution in support of animal territories.
Resource-favorable technology. (Compare points 10, 15 and 16).

3. Population stabilization. What population level, locally and
globally, would best serve human values and life in general? Ultimate
reduction of homo sapiens population. Preservation of plant and animal
populations - today principally a problem of the industrial countries
because of their pollution and resource consumption. In the long run, an
essential problem in the Third World. Optimal distribution of the
population. Changes in residential patterns, both in the struggle
against pollution and resource waste, but also in connection with points
5, 6, 7 and many others.

4. Class struggle. Political opposition to extremely uneven resource
distribution within and between mega-societies. This can be considered a
special case of point 2. An end to the relationship between
overconsumption, status, and the upper classes. A reduction in the
material aspiration level in the industrial countries. An increased
sense for quality of life. The elimination of wage levels and salary
levels which make overconsumption possible or probable. Income range
decrease. More use, less consumption.

5. Reduction of 'remote controls'. Self-direction, self-determination,
local control. Both biological and human ecology illustrate that living,
dynamic communities are dependent upon knowledge and control of their
local environment, and the absence of a steady introduction of novel and
uncontrollable remote forces. Reduction of the number of steps in the
pyramids of administration. Reduction of bureaucracy.

6. Decentralization. The greater the degree of centralization, and the
greater the size of the economic or administrative units, the more
fragmentary the self-direction and self-determination.

7. Local communities. Stable, close human relationships which give
security and warmth can only be found within relatively small groups.
The mega-society lacks deep daily communion. Small societies,
particularly local communities, embody such communion. The requirement
for local control makes it imperative to strengthen local communities
and to re-create them in urban areas. - Resource priority for the local
populations. For example, local communities along the coast

must be assured the resources won through their own daily work.

8. District development. A transference of the center

from metropolis to the district, from the mega-society to the local
community. Dismantling the former, i.e. the central machinery, the huge
freeways, the accumulation of adminis-trative, industrial, and
educational centers within selected limited areas. - Against sector
thinking and sector adminis-

tration. Reduction of forced mobility of the working class and weekly
long-distance commuters. The priority given to worker mobility must
cease.

9. Self-reliance. 'Self-made is well-made'. As a conse-

quence of the self-determination norm, self-reliance must receive
greater priority. Trade is not beneficial in itself, it must serve an
acceptable purpose. The equalization of resource consumption
necessitates more self-reliance on the part of the industrial countries.
The extended self-control to be exercised by the local communities is
dependent upon a high degree of self-reliance. The foregoing has as a
consequence emphasis on soft and near technology. The latter implies the
use of raw materials whatever else is needed without long transports.

10.Work sharing, not work fragmentization. Autonomous activity
presupposes meaningful work (in a satisfying milieu). Work for the
economically and otherwise least well off must be given priority.
(Compare point 4). As much as possible, the product of this labor ought
to satisfy a need rather than a mere desire.

11. Complexity (many-sidedness), not complication. Mature, stable
ecosystems are characterized by an ingenious and diverse use of
resources. Furthermore, each ecological community has alternative ways
of satisfying a need. If exter-

nal factors reduce one possibility, the local environment can be used in
alternative ways. Flexibility. Complication, e.g. travelling from
residence to place of work in large cities, is characterized by a large
number of influences from afar, and distractions from over-stimulation.

12. Diversity. Self-realization individually and at all collective
stages presupposes the accessibility of diverse possibilities for
personal growth - various activities, and occupations, the utilization
of geographical and climatic peculiarities. Exploration of different art
forms, broad cultural variation. Preservation of diverse cultures. An
end to meaningless destruction of cultures: Cultures are "steam-rolled
into non-existence" (Fredrik Barth). An end to the overlording of
minority cultures, e.g. the Lapplanders (Sami). Support of nomadic
cultures.

13. Local culture. Support to the local cultural diversity within
nations. Support of those movements in the Third World which face up to
the challenges of our time but attempt at the same time to maintain
local cultural traditions.

14. In popular biology, the "struggle for survival" - understood to be a
fight for life or death - has been a central maxim. A keyword in modern
ecology is contending for precedence: Symbiosis, 'a true companionship
where the members receive mutual benefit'. The 'live and let live'
principle is

lived through the use of each other's peculiar qualities and particular
adaptions to varying milieus, the niches. Utilization of different
ecological 'niches'. Symbiosis is necessary, among other reasons, to
strengthen the richness and diversity of life forms.

15. In principle, equal right to self-realization (unfolding of self)
for all life forms: Egalitariansim in the biosphere. We humans have
extra obligations toward one another. But in principle the right to life
and self-realization is one and the same. Fight against mankind's
self-destructive association with other life forms, and against its
hubris, its superiority complex. More cohabitation with plants and
animals. Fight against degrading treatment of animals e.g. in research,
consumer industry, and industrialized agricul-

ture. (A particular case of 2). Preservation of the resources of
animals, including territories. Fight against the exter-

mination of plant and animal species. Solidarity, 'I-Thou', rather than
'I-It' relationship to nature. Expansion of the traditional natural
right movement.

16. Fight against the self-domestication tendency of mankind: the
tendency to make domesticated animals of ourselves. - Studies of
domesticated animals and animals in confined zoos illustrate that animal
species create new social forms and act differently in their new
artificial, standardized, and milieu-poor conditions. One finds
passivity, broken by brutality and arbitrary aggression, tyrannical
tendencies, promiscuity, disintegration of family ties, dulling of the
senses, degeneration of muscles and coordination of movement etc. In the
industrial states, similar tendencies seem to be manifest. People are
rendering themselves domesticated beings controlled by an impersonal
administrative machinery. Two tertiary occupations dominate, the
entertainment industry (including sport, but not outdoor life) and
support services (we transform ourselves into patients and clients).

17. Field thinking. Interaction (samspill, inter-play) in nature.
Gestalt thinking. Everything is interconnected with everything else, in
a field of mutual dependence relation-

ships. Relation thinking, holistic thought, and system thinking, as
opposed to causal and thing thinking. Cognition can be interpreted as
action within a field (Spinoza), as a form of 'praxis' (Marx).

18. Docta ignorantia, conscious ignorance. The inter-

dependent relationships which ecologists study are so complex that in
questions of the long-range, general consequences of human interference,
the response will always be: "We do not know!". One of the greatest
services of ecology is that it has made us less arrogant and
self-confident in our belief that we, through science and technology,
can lord over nature. The burden of proof and the responsibility for
intervention rest with the intervener.

- About 5 of the 18 points may be said to be directly ecological and
biocentric, 3 (points 4, 5 and 8) are political in a fairly direct way,
9 are broadly social, and one, point 18, is epistemological. Comparing
the list with the 20-point

list of Johan Galtung, the overlapping is great. Here are some

key terms which are not found among the 18 points: cooperative
enterprises, more labor- and creativity-intensive production,
non-military,non-violent defense,decoupling from Super Powers, high
level of non-formal education, feminist movements.

The 8 'way of life' points of the 20-point list run as follows:[6]

Mainstream Green

1.Non-manual work, eliminating keeping the gains when

heavy, dirty, dangerous work healthy, mixing manual

and non-manual

2.Material comfort, dampening keeping the gains when

fluctations of nature healthy, living closer to nature

3.Privatism, withdrawal into communal life in big-

family and peer groups ger unit, collective

production/consumption

4.Security, the probability keeping security when

that this will last healthy, making life style less predictable

1.Alcohol, tranquillizers, moderation, experi-

drugs ments with non-addic-

tive, life-enhancing

things

2.Tobacco, sugar, salt, tea/ moderation,enhancing

coffee the body's capacity for joy, e.g. through sex

3.Chemically treated food, panem bio-organic cultivat-

natural fibers removed ion, health food, bal-

anced food, moderation

4.Circuses, TV, sport, specta- generationg own enter-

torism tainment, moderate ex-

ercise, particularly

as manual work, walk-

ing, bicycling

The 20-point list contrasts mainstream with greens, the 18 point-list
concerns the contrast between a mainstream environmentalism, the
"shallow" movement, and a more radical variety. Both lists deny that
people either concur with all or with none of the points, the picture is
blurred.[7]

3. The Naess-Sessions 8-point list. Inconsistency of lists?

What about the 8-point published first time in 1984, and now under
slight revision? At first it may seem that the 8-point list has little
to do or is even incompatible with the longer list of 18 points. But
firstly, it is necessary to formulate fairly precisely what they are a
list of. The 8-point list has two different functions. The descriptive
function is such that each sentence might start as follows: "Most
supporters of the deep ecology movement think - on the rather abstract
and general level - that ...". That is, we get 8 hypotheses which, if
made more precise, could lead to research within social sciences.
(Complication: if the researcher asks, "Who are the persons I am going
to ask about their thoughts?", exactly what are we going to answer?) The
normative function is to verbally articulate the author's proposal for a
kind of platform most supporters might accept as characteristic of their
attitude as supporters of the deep ecology movement.

The political aspect of the movement is the theme of only one point,
No.6. And it is only said that the previous points imply deep social and
other policy changes evidently requiring work on the political level.
More to the point: What changes and how are they realized: which kind of
political instruments are available to force the realization of such
changes - soon? Not a single word is said about that. One main reason
was the necessity, in my view, to reveiw critically the social and
political part of the old 18- and 20-point surveys. Difficult in
1984!And also to formulate simple sentences as conclusions. The gap
between social and political themes and those of

life in general is in the 18-point list filled in with themes of human
ecology. Class struggle among humans (point 4) violates the general,
biocentric, norms of resource distri-

bution. Local control (point 5) is seen as a special appli-

cation of a general ecological norm concerning the mastering of forces
in the neighborhood. The same applies to points 6 and 7,
decentralization and local community life. In short, the politics of the
deep ecology movement is spelled out in terms of human ecology.

In green politics, especially when inspired by Marxist or anarchist
trends, human ecology has been counted as a biolo-

gical rather than social science, and close connection with

the biological sciences has been avoided. I don't see any reason to
argue against this tendency. A platform of deep ecology politics may be
worked out without any explicit reference to human ecology.[8] But in
ecosophy T the connection is deemed valuable and it does not imply
uncritical acceptance of sociobiology as worked out by E.O.Wilson.

The green wave in the United States started and culmi-

nated about 5 years ahead of the analogous happenings in Europe. But let
me conceive the green wave as roughly covering the time from 1965 to
1975. What happened from 1975 to 1985 involves for many of us a terrible
disappointment. Consider the optimistic and enthusiastic attitudes
concerned with local communities and non-urbanized groups. It was again
and again, with few exceptions, seen that unecological 'development' was
accepted, even actively sought. We tried in Scandinavia to avoid
pessimistic conclusions by making a sharp distinction between small
administrative units and local communities. Evidently the small
administrative units were coerced by more central administrative bodies
to carry out policies which were much too costly. So,they had to look
desperately for increases

of income - irrespective of the implied environmental damage. But
gradually it was clear that local communities mostly supported
unecological policies. For instance 'developing' wilderness bordering on
their community. Areas were often saved through the action by central
authorities which bought land or forced conservation measures. There
should be points among the 18 or 20 that favor certain forms of national
and global centralization, of investing sufficient power to overrule
local unecological decisions. And it must be done soon.

Considering the great difference in the wording of the 18 points
compared with that of the 8 points, it is very under-

standable that Richard Sylvan in his above-mentioned

critique of 'deep ecology' concluded that there is an inconsistency.[9]
The same was implied in Golley's assessment.[10] But it contained an
encouraging conclusion: Acceptability of 'deep ecology' from a
scientific ecological point of view.

The radical environmental views expressed in the 18-point list would
neither be accepted by millions nor lead to extensive activism if it
were not for the philosophical, religious, and purely ethical
indignation felt by millions when contemplating human arrogance towards
nature. The indignation may be said to be based on views about the
intrinsic value of non-human life and lack of right to behave as we do.
Behind the indignation, behind the ethical as well

as axiological view we find ontology: We have to do with fundamental
ways of perceiving and apperceiving reality.

The radicalism of the political points among the 18 and the 20 is more
or less inevitable if the 5 first points of the 8 are firmly accepted.
In short:The three lists are different, but not incompatible.

4. The third decade of the deep ecology movement: Global perspectives

As stated above, the 8-point list tells through its point No.6 that in
order to realize the objectives of the deep ecology movement, vast
changes of social and political character must occur. Today I would like
to reformulate, substituting "fully realize" for the simple "realize".
The background of the suggested change of wording is the disappointing
political developments from 1975 to 1985, that is, in the second deep
ecology decade, and a conviction that some important objectives can be
realized without the vast changes necessary to full realization of all
objectives.

Instead of decentralization we find increasing centralization, instead
of following the slogan 'Small is beautiful' we find gigantism,
elimination of small farmers, instead of an ecologically acceptable
conception of GNP we still find it roughly equal to Gross National
Pollution, instead of reforestation, we find deforestation, and the
slogan 'If you have seen one tree you have seen them all'.

In the 80s it was clear that the necessary social and political changes
to realize deep ecology objectives fully would take a perillously long
time. In the meantime the pressure must be increased to stop degradation
of conditions of life on Earth - in spite of the ecologically
reactionary general policies. What can be saved without significant
changes in dominant social and political patterns, must be

saved. More and more people are aware of the fate whatever their
political color. We need help from all, whether politically blue, red or
green.

Organizations such as "Earth First!" gain in relative importance,
hopefully without diminishing the efforts of social and political
activists to implement ecologically valuable social and political
changes clearly articulated in the late 60s and early 70s.

One of the best slogans of the 70s has been 'Think globally, act
locally!'. Unhappily this can be misunderstood. Every movement of our
limb is geographically local, but as part of an action within the
ecosphere, it has consequences for the ecosphere and is in an important
sense a global action. An example: when a youngster uses for fun his
motor vehicle outside roads in the extremely sensitive arctic landscape
in Northern Norway, he reduces the small area of still unspoiled major
arctic landscapes of Europe and of the planet. The central government
therefore prohibits this kind of fun. The locals are mostly furious
about the "southerners"' interference. They detest being manipulated by
the central

authorities of Norway and they have made more than enough wilderness.

The youngster does not know that millions feel strongly about the
landscape he is degrading. It is a joy for these millions to conceive
the existence of these landscapes. It is part of their quality of life
to be citizens of the Earth and not of their own country. The example is
only one among thou-sands where local, mostly 'peripheral' groups resist
effect-

ively ecological sane policies. In the 70s there was a wide-

spread belief that local communities would in general support global
goals.

In the 70s it was important to generalize concepts of pollution,
resources, and population to 'pollution for (living being) x',
'resources for x' and 'population of x'. Now the concepts of action need
to be modified as 'action on x'. The burning of a tank of gasoline is
not only an action on the gasoline, on the engine, on the atmosphere
above a certain place, but also an action on the ecosphere, a global
action.

The emphasis on globality should somehow manifest itself when
formulating lists of the different generalizatins discussed above. The
third decade may prove to be increasingly a decade of intergrating the
local and global point of view.

The effort to formulate in a few words, let us say from 200 to 500, what
the lists of 8, 18 and 20 points try to accomplish, should be repeated
when planning actions and campaigns in the rest of the third decade of
the deep ecology movement. In what follows I shall make some
suggestions.

The 18-point list does not intend to limit the points such that they
seem to be acceptable and important to most supporters of the deep
ecology movement. Let me choose no.16 as an example.

Human self-domestication is a peculiar term, many would

also find the idea strange. The point belongs to a particular ecosophy,
ecosophy T. A next edition of an 18-point list might still cover 18
families of key terms, phrases, catchwords and slogans, normative and
descriptive, but there would be changes of emphasis. (The number 18 is
clearly somewhat arbitary because of great overlapping 'across the
board'.)

Reformulation of the first point:

1. Radical decrease of total global pollution! Radical decrease of per
capita pollutin by the materially rich countries! Elimination of lethal
pollution affecting fauna and flora, locally and globally! Elimination
of transfer of polluting industry to poor countries! Priority of
elimination of causes of local and global pollution rather than
spectacular symptoms and consequences! Priority of care of whole
ecosystems rather than of fragments of systems, concern for the
ecosphere as a whole!

This reformulation makes the list too long. Four times the global aspect
is mentioned, three times the essential combination of local and global
(as contrasted with the national and internatinal). The term 'materially
rich' is preferred to just 'rich' to suggest that the ideal development
is not towards the materially rich,but communities realizing

the ideal 'simple in means, rich in ends', or 'dwelling in the
realization of what is an end in itself'.

The introduction of the term 'care' might be important because by it
bridges the gap between the 18-point and the 8-point perspectives: Care
is elicited because of the intrinsic value attributed to the richness
and diversity on Earth as a whole, and to each living being.

To what extent is the German green party program consistent with the
8-point platform? David Orton[11] states that the program ecosophically
"is essentially a stewardship position".

"It therefore raises the important question whether the denigration of
the stewardship position, by some deep ecologists, is correct."

If we think of God as superbly wise it is ridiculous or even blasphemous
to assert that God placed humans as managers of ecosystems. But the term
"steward" many mean different things than managing the property of
others. Perhaps the God of the Bible may have recommended that we manage
in a decent way our own dealings with the rest of creation, so that we
do not degrade its richness and diversity.

A central ecophilosophical passage of the program of the Greens reads as
follows:

  "It is necessary to maintain or restore a biologically intact
  environment, in order to ensure the humane survival of future
  generations."

If a teacher first asks the pupils: "What is necessary in order to
ensure the human survival of future generations?", the quoted sentence
would be a good answer. Suppose now that the teacher asks, "Is this
maintenance and restoration necessary only to ensure human survival?"
and the answer is "No, it is also necessary to ensure richness and
diversity of life forms on Earth." The two answers are consistent with
each other. None contradicts nor implies the statement that richness and
diversity of life forms have intrinsic value.

What we call the reform or shallow movement is a movement practically
without reference to the intrinsic value of the planet with its
phenomenal richness and diversity of life in a wide sense of the word
'living'. No reference to a strong motive for preservation for its own
sake among millions of people, no use of intrinsic worth as strong
argument for the care of ecosystems, wholes, ultimately the whole Earth.
All this is more or less ignored.

If we ask whether a sentence, a paragraph or other small units of text
or talk show adherence to the shallow rather than deep ecology movement,
we must consider whether these small units adequately express the whole
position. The adjectives 'shallow' and 'deep' refer to whole positions.

A statement like "This chemical should be banned because it may cause
cancer (in humans)." does not in any way express

a whole position. Supporters of the deep ecology movement are assumed to
defend a position that has four levels. The question of intrinsic values
of non-human life is positively at level 2. I expect that in the future,
green parties will have programs that are consistent with the 8 points,
but of course take up a variety of themes more or less independent of
those points. The formulations of the German program may be variously
interpreted. I tend to conclude that it is consistent with the 8 points,
that is, no contradiction is produced if a text is made to include both
the German program and the 8 points.

5.The Brundtland Report

One of the encouraging happenings in 1988 is the publication of the
Brundtland Report. A number of politicians have agreed to a statement
which has sustainable development as a central slogan rather than just
development, or even worse, economic development. The argumentation is
mainly of the shallow or reform types, but due to the vagueness and
ambiguity there is ample room for deep ecology interpretation where this
is important.

Since the industrial countries all support unsustainable development,
the great task of a greener policy will consist in changes in the
direction of a course that is sustainable. If we use the term
'developing' as shorthand for 'developing sustainably', the industrial
countries are not yet developing countries. But one may prefer a wider
terminology including a

main change of policy in the direction of sustainability. I shall here
prefer that terminology. It means that we hopefully within the year 2000
can class the industrial countries as developing countries.[12]

As it is now the situation is unclear where to place the distinction
developing/not yet developing. When industrial pollution is planned to
be cut 50%, and this is all, the development is still unsustainable. But
if the plan is long range and more radical, the direction is towards
sustain-

ability. Considering the great political obstacles facing such plans on
the governmental level, their adoption would be a great feat, and the
honorable title 'green policy' is justifiable.

The relation between the reform (or shallow) and the deep ecology
movement may in this context be compared with the relation between
reform and deep change of prison policies in one of the many cruel
societies. A reform policy would for instance say that within 5 years
there should be no prisons where inmates are chained both by foot and
hand. A plan for deeper change might accept this rule but explicitly say
that it is only a step towards prisons without chains or a society

without prisons. The use of the term 'developing country' in the wide
sense corresponds to the 'developing prison policy', when it is
envisioned that chains will eventually be discarded. The long range
aspect of the process is here essential. Green political programs cannot
be dominated by formulation of long range objectives. Party programs
have in Europe, and should (I think) have sections on principles. The
difficult problem of priorities, of tactic, of timing, makes the life of
the party planner very special. It differs widely from that of a
political theorist.

The polemics and conflicts between the so-called 'funda-

mentalists'and other green party members are sometimes disastrous in
spite of near conformity of opinions among all greens. In so far as they
are supporters of the deep ecology movement, one may say that disasters
occur mainly from not keeping the 4 levels of the apron diagram clear
and separate. An example closely related to what happened in West
Germany: A proposal is made is insert "Elimination of experimentation
iwth live animals!" Arbitrarily interpreting this sentence as synonymous
with "Elimination of absolutely all kinds of experimentation ...", a
majority reject the proposal. The proposer - a central figure of the
party - resigns in disgust. He is labelled a faithful fundamentalist.
But the majority did not really differ from him in opinion: it was a
question of timing, of keeping within the political 'possible', of
support from non-green politicians with similar, but not as radical

ideas etc. In short, views belonging to levels 1 and 2 ("ideology") were
confused with views belonging to levels 3 and 4 ("political realities").
In old parties the polemics would have been mildened by means of
political semantics. The "elimination"-sentence would have been retained
as a slogan, but somehow more precise formulations would have made it
clear that certain kinds of experiments, for instance within veterinary
science and for the sake of the animals themselves, would be permitted.

One cannot expect non-green politicians in their public speeches and
writings to express characteristics ideas of the deep ecology movement.
Therefore the report of the Commission is careful to be 100%
homocentric.

It is not within the orbit of the thinking of the Commission to envisage
that decreases of richness and diversity would only be tolerated for
vital purposes. And there is no proposal to look for long range
reduction of population. If the writers of the report are supporters of
the deep ecology movement, they have not found it tactically desirable
to reveal it.

A (genuinely) green party would have to frame a very different proposal
for guidelines of development. But this does detract from the value of
the Brundtland Report as a proposal on the way towards politically
realistic proposals for sustainable development of the industrial
nations. It clearly denies the status of industrial countries as
sustainable, and help the so-called developing countries in their
critique of the industrials. Never more will it be

proposed that the poor countries should or can develop towards the
ecological insane conditions of the rich. The Report does not explicitly
reject politics consistent with deep ecology objectives, it only ignores
the issues.

8. Concluding remark

The ecological movements, whatever their specialities and deepness of
questioning, have something in common that favors cooperation and
tolerance of disagreement and of different approaches. Myriads of new
pieces of information have to be digested and also a series of new
concepts. Theorizing have to be tentative and open-ended. Efforts at
mild conceptual clarifications should proceed as part of the joy of
working together.

[1] Reading this article I am embarrassed to see how much I quote myself
and how little I quote others whom I often feel more worthy of
quotation. I constantly use their writings, but I always work to improve
and change my own.

[2] The useful terms 'deep ecology theory' and 'deep ecology theorist'
have been introduced recently and refer at least to the three, perhaps
all four levels of the apron-diagram. Deep ecology theory therefore
includes hypotheses and instrumental norms belonging to political
philosophy and to politics. But does it contain non-instrumental norms?
An ecosophy does. If it contains such basic normative principles, the
key term 'theory' may not be the most fortunate. - Apron diagrams: Bill
Devall & George Sessions, Deep Ecology, p.226. In that book and in the
following article there is also the '8 points list' of common
assumptions within the deep ecology movement: A.Naess, "The Deep Ecology
Movement: Some Philosophical Aspects", Philosophical Inquiry, 5, 1986.
See furthermore David Bennet, & R.Sylvan, "Deep Ecology and Green
Politics", the Trumpeter, 4, No.2, 1987, p.17.

[3] "The Green Movement: A Socio-Historical Exploration", Gandhi Marg,
7, June 1985.

[4] Quotations are translated from the 5th Norwegian edition (1976) of
Ecolog, Community and Lifestyle, pp.16-19. Point 5 and a couple of
others follow in part an older edition. The list is not made up to date
in 1989 - The 7 points stated in my "The Shallow and the Deep,
Long-Range, Ecology Movement. A Summary", Inquiry, 1973, refer
respectively to point 17, 15, 12, 14, 4, 11, 5 and 6 of the 18 points.

[5] Bennett & Sylvan, op.cit., p.16.

[6] A comparison of such lists reveals the many-sidedness of questions
of life-style and also reveals differences of ways of expressing the
different aspects. I have published a list of 24 characteristics or
tendencies of deep ecology life-style, unfortunately forgetting a 25th:
vegetarianism (of various degrees). "Deep Ecology and Life Style", in
Neil Evernden, ed., The Paradox of Environmentalism, York University,
Faculty of Environmental Studies, June 1984, pp. 57-79.

[7] For a valuable gradation of 'deepness' or 'radicalness' of
environmental positions, see Richard Sylvan, "A Critique of Deep
Ecology", Discussion Papers, No.12, Philosophy Department, RSSS,
Australian National university, 1985.

[8] A recommendable introduction to human ecology: Bengt Hubendick,
MÃ¤nniskoekologi, Stockholm 1985.

[9] Richard Sylvan, "A Critique of Deep Ecology", Radical Philosophy,
40, Sept. 1985.

[10] Environmental Ethics, Spring 1987, pp.45-55

[11] The Trumpeter, 4, 1987, p.40.

[12] "Sustainable Development and the Deep Ecology", Ethics, Culture and
Sustainable Development, ed. J.Ronald Engel, Belhaven Press, London,
1990.
