1989X

The Third World, Wilderness and Deep Ecology[1]

Arne Naess

I

In ecology and related fields of discussion the term 'wilderness' has
often been used of large areas of land 'with no human settlements'. The
so-called 'savages' were considered parts of the wilderness. They were
classed as humans, but their homes were not considered 'human
settlements'. The small changes they caused in the ecosystems were
mostly reversible. People who have adopted the way of life of
contemporary industrial-agricultural societies interfere so strongly
with natural processes that even a small number of them can
significantly change the landscape.

Throughout most of human history, humans have lived only in what we now
call wilderness. Before agriculture our ancestors left few traces. The
ecosystems were not appreciably changed, except perhaps, through big
fires and probably through the extermination of some species of big
animals as a result of hunting. Landscapes and ecosystems were for the
most part not irreversibly reduced in richness and diversity, and the
conditions of life were upheld. There is, therefore, essentially no
conflict between human presence in considerable numbers and the state of
wilderness.

The greatest single devastation of wilderness in recent times has
occurred in the USA. For example, the transformation of the
Pre-Columbian Californian wilderness paradise might go down in the
history of this century as the most tragic destruction of free nature.
It is tragic because the invaders knew what they were doing. They were
completely in charge of development and had in their midst people who
showed them a way to 'live and let live'.

The interference per capita was thousands of times greater than that of
former inhabitants. It is therefore unavoidable that some people in
California who care for life and landscapes tend to see a direct and
global antagonism between human settlement and wilderness. 'Either
humans or free nature'. But supporters of the deep ecology movement,
like many others, know that wilderness need not be destroyed by people
living there or nearby.

"Just a few centuries ago, when virtually all was wild in North America,
wilderness was not something exceptionally

severe. Pronghorn and Bison trailed through the grasslands, creeks ran
full of salmon, there were acres of clams, and

grizzlies, cougar, and bighorn sheep were common in the lowlands. There
were human beings, too: North America was all populated. There were
people everywhere." "All of the hills and lakes of Alaska have been
named in one or another of the dozen or so languages spoken by the
native people."[2]

To interfere as little as the American Indians is today clearly out of
the question, but Gary Snyder - as other American supporters of the deep
ecology movement - insists that there should be no further destruction
of wilderness in their land. Even what is now set aside as wilderness is
too much interfered with. The point of view of the old US Forest Service
still has power:

"Wilderness is for people... The preservation goals established ... are
designed to provide values and benefits to society ... Wilderness is not
set aside for the sake of its flora or fauna, but for people." It is not
only the "but" that makes all the difference from the point of view of
Gary Snyder, but also the term "society".[3] People living in wilderness
and from wilderness form communities rather than "societies". There is a
vast difference between the slogan of WWF 'wilderness for people' and
the USFS 'wilderness only for people'.

The people active in the US trying to stop the destruction of wilderness
do not publish general proposals on how to treat apparently similar
problems in the Third World. This is true, at least, of theoreticians of
the deep ecology movement. But clearly the principle formulated by Gary
Snyder is applicable also in the Third World countries: There is no
inherent antagonism between human settlement and free nature, for it all
depends on to what kind of culture the humans belong. With increases in
standard of living via industrial society practices the interference in
the ecosystems inevitably increases. However, it is a great universal
goal to avoid that kind of consumerism and instead concentrate on
raising the quality of life.

Today more than 100 million people live in the tropical forests in a
broad sustainable way, that is, without reducing the richness and
diversity of life forms. But what is now going on involves invading
these areas, the forests are cut and burnt and subsistence agriculture
is introduced, but it cannot help the poor to reach the goals of
economic progress. Instead this destruction will cause further poverty
and suffering.

It has been pointed out that the economy of some of the North American
native cultures was ecologically long range superbly sustainable in the
broad sense. Furthermore, it has

been noted that the philosophical, religious and mythological basis for
these economies, and for their social relations in general, was
expressed through sayings eminently consistent with the fundamental
attitudes found in the deep ecology movement. This is remarkable in many
ways, but what is even more remarkable is the absence of a formidable
ecological crisis in colonial North America, which is one of the
motivations and a driving force behind the deep ecology movement.

"The coupling of (ancient) Eastern and (modern) ecological wisdom
seemingly helps consolidate the claim that deep ecology is a philosophy
of universal significance."[4] The total views suggested among
supporters of the deep ecology movement do in a sense couple "ancient
Eastern and (modern) ecological wisdom." But there are reasons to be
cautious here.

To cherish some of the ecosophic attitudes convincingly shown by people
living 'East of Eden' does not imply the doctrinal acceptance of any
definite philosophy or religion conventionally classifed as Eastern.
Heavy influence does not imply conformity with all beliefs: The history
of ideas and contemporary philosophizing are different subjects. Anyhow,
there is ample reason for supporters of the deep ecology movement to
refrain from questioning each other's ultimate beliefs. Deep cultural
differences are more or less cognitively unbridgeable and will remain
so.

Desperately poor, hungry people naturally have a narrow utilitarian
atttitude towards their environment. The people of the Third World,
apart from the desperate minority, manifest concern for free nature, and
a respect for non-human living beings. Not all, of course, but scarcely
less than in countries of the West. At least this is my experience,
while living among poor people in Pakistan and Nepal. Others agree with
me. Pressing problems of material need might monopolize their attention,
but this is true of people in similar circumstances in the West, despite
our affluence.

II

To social ecologists in countries less rich than the US, it may look
threatening to see how environmental activists in

the US declare an unflinching opposition to human attacks on

undisturbed wilderness.[5] Some even engage in 'ecosobatage',

ruining vehicles, but of course see to it that nobody gets hurt. There
has, so far, been no authenticated case of anybody being hurt.

Clearly these activists speak of wilderness in the US, not about other
continents. This, at least, is certainly true of supporters of the deep
ecology movement. Unflinching opposition to any cutting down of trees,
any establishment of new human settlement in any wilderness whatsoever
is a preposterous idea or wild dream.

Yet the destruction of 'old growth' forests in the richest nations in
the world still goes on. There is ample justification for activists in
the United States to focus on the mindless, irreversible processes that
are still going on there. The term 'ecocriminality' is a suitable word
to use here, and a question of great importance arises: Given their own
practice, do the rich nations deserve any credibility when preaching
ecological responsibility to poor countries?

One has to distinguish between three things: (1) the dismal present
situatioin of lack of protection of wilderness; (2) the estimates
published by conservation biologists about the size of wilderness areas
needed for continued speciation; and (3) the more or less realistic plan
put forth by established organizations on how to improve the present
state of affairs. From the estimates of Frankel and Soul√® that an area
on the order of 600.000 square kilometers is necessary for speciation of
birds and mammals, nothing follows about how to realize what is deemed
necessary.

Is the idea that "the biosphere as a whole should be zoned" a threat? If
so, it is more of a threat directed against First World practices than
against any other nations. According to Odum and Phillips, establishment
of kinds of protection zones "may be the only way to limit the
destructive impact of our technological-industrial-agribusiness complex
upon the earth."[6] This is clearly a warning directed to the First, not
the Third World. But of course, if the Third World elites try to copy
the First World excesses, the situation changes.

III

There is no reason for supporters of the deep ecology movement to try to
cover all the vast issues of the green movement worldwide.

Inspiration came largely from the US ecology movement, but transplanted
to European soil, 'green-ness' broadened considerably. In Scandinavia it
received earlier the name 'the alternative future movement'. This is a
good name because it expresses a comprehensive vision - or a family of
similar visions - of the future. The green movement thus concieved may
roughly be said to comprise the peace movement, the social justice
movement, the alternative technology movement and the

ecology movement. The second component is the most hetero-

geneous, containing visions of human rights, fair global economic
distribution, and non-hierarchical social structures.[7] Even if the
term 'ecology' is interpreted in a very broad way, it is confusing to
identify the green movement or alternative future movement with the
ecology movement.

In short, it is misleading to criticize the deep ecology movement for
not covering all the issues of the green movement. However close the
cooperation, there will be in the foreseeable future at least four
movements rather than one. Consequently there is no reason for
supporters of the deep ecology movement as such to try to formulate
complete green party programs. They will concentrate on the ecological
crisis, including its social and political consequences.

In the Third World the green movement in part takes on different forms
than in the First. For good reasons the social justice movement carries
great weight there than in the First World. Consequently, there is
little ground for supporters of the deep ecology movement to try to
derive from ecologically inspired ideas any Third World green party
programs, or to enter the debate of social vs. ecological priorities.
Most supporters of the deep ecology movement have opinions which make it
natural for them to join the greens, and some are as intensely active as
political greens. They tend, however, to think that in some cases a kind
of 'green' society resulting from green politicis might not be
adequately green, if it is incompatible with their basic tenets. Long
range ecological sustainability is a 'must', but it does not imply a
complete, alternative future.

Ecologically sustainability is conceived by some to be reached when
policies make us safe from great ecological catastrophes. It is below
our dignity to have this as a supreme goal! Ecological sustainability in
a more proper sense is only achieved when policies on a global scale
secure full richness and diversity of life forms. The former goal may be

called 'narrow', the latter 'wide' ecologically sustainability. In
short, it is, in my opinion, a necessary but not sufficient criterion of
the fully achieved green-ness of a society that it is ecological
sustainable in the wide sense. The Brundtland Report admits of various
interpretations, but it clearly does envisage a sustainable 'developed'
country as a country that satisfies the wide sense of ecological
sustainability.

IV

As pointed out by deep ecology theorists and others since the 60s, a
shift must be realized "in consumption and production patterns" which
"requires the creation of alternate economic and political structures."
(Guha, p.80). The positive view of the internal relation between humans
and the ecosophere does not make this a process of renunciation. It
makes for a gain in human self-realization, not a loss. One may speak of
not only the material waste of the industrial countries but also of a
philosophical waste. Needless to say, the problem of material and
philosophical waste in the Third World is only relevant to the power
elites.

In the book Deep Ecology by Bill Devall and George Sessions, there is a
short section titled "Basic principles of deep ecology". Point 6 runs as
follows: "Policies must therefore be changed. These policies affect
basic economic, technological, and ideological structures. The resulting
state of affairs will be deeply different from the present."

It is obviously pertinent to ask: "Exactly which changes?" In 1990 a
good answer seems much more difficult to provide than it was in 1970.
Practically every major concrete change envisaged in 1970 seems today
either more difficult to realize, or simply not desirable in the form
proposed in 1970. As a preliminary to serious discussion one must
specify which state, country, region, society and community, one has in
mind. Practically all deep ecology literature concentrates on rich
countries even though there are many supporters in other kinds of
countries. As an example of social and political change that was highly
recommended in 1970, but not in 1990, one may mention certain forms of
decentralization. Today the global character of all main ecological
problems is recognized and also the stubborn resistance of most local,
regional and national groups to give global concerns priority over the
less than global, even when this is urgently needed in order to attain
global sustainability.

Whereas the poor in the Third World may seem more helpless than the
coastal population of Arctic Norway, the ecological conflicts are to a
remarkable degree of the same kind. Communities which live largely on
fishing within a day's distance from land are depopulated, or are in
extreme difficulties, because of the large-scale trawlers' fishing for
export. The resources of the Norway Sea, and even of the vast

Barent Sea, have been badly depleted. For the coastal population, it is
'a question of sheer survival', but because Norway is a rich welfare
state of sorts, there is no chance that they will go to bed hungry.

The supporters of the deep ecology movement in the rich countries do not
go against the supporters in the Third World, nor in the Fourth. Such a
behavior would be strange indeed.

The Sami people, traditionally called the Lapps, a Fourth World nomadic
people living in Arctic Soviet Union, Finland, Sweden and Norway, have
in the last 400 years resisted being dominated by these four powerful
states. When, as a part of an unnecessary hydro-electric development, a
big dam was projected in their lands, thousands of First World people
joined in a protest. When a Sami was arrested for 'unlawfully' standing
at the shore of the river, the police asked him, "Why do you stay
here?", he answered, "This place is part of myself." I know of no major
ecological conflict anywhere which has not manifested the power and
initiative of people who are not alienated from free nature, but protect
it for its own sake as something which has meaning in itself independent
of narrow human utility.

Often the 'environmental concern' of poor, Third World communities seems
to Westerners to relate to "environment per se". An example: The people
of the Buddhist community Beding (Peding) in Rolwaling Himalaya live
with the majestic holy mountain Gauri Shankar (Tseringma) straight above
their heads. It had long been the object of religious respect. Some of
us (mountaineers and deep ecology supporters) asked whether the people
wished to enjoy the profit they would get from expeditions by Westerners
and Japanese who try to 'conquer the mountain', or to protect the
mountain itself from being trodden upon by humans with no respect for
its cultural status. The families of the community came together and
unanimously voted for protection. I had the honor of walking with the
chief of the community, G√∂den, for a week, to deliver at Kathmandu a
document addressed to the King of Nepal, asking for a prohibition on the
climbing of Gauri Shankar. There was no reply. The rich Hindu government
of Nepal is economically interested in big expeditions, and the opinions
of the faraway Buddhist communities of poor people carry little weight
with them.

Consider an example from Africa.

Large areas where the Masai live may be classed as areas of free nature.
The Masai are not disturbed by the vast population of spectacular
animals such as lions, jaguars and hundreds of other animals, nor are
these animals severely disturbed by the Masai. There has for a long time
been a remarkable compatibility between them. As more or less nomadic
herders the Masai do not need land for agricultural purposes.

What applies to the Masai applies to a great number of other peoples and
cultures of the Third World. Ecologically sustainable economic
development may proceed in direct continuity with their traditional
culture.

The Masai now use more money for motor vehicles and other products they
don't make themselves. This makes it tempting to sell parts of their
territories to farmers looking for land for their many children. From
the point of view of economic development such sale is unfortunate
because the relevant kind of subsistence agriculture does not lead to
economic progress. The Masai can get sufficient cash through very
carefully managed tourism and still have the traditional use of the land
and preserve their cultural continuity. Some supporters of the deep
ecology movement are working with the Masai to help them keep what is
left of their land intact. Increase of subsistance farming is a blind
alley in many areas. But the

alternatives are all very problematic and there are no easy answers to
be found anywhere.

From any complex argumentation pattern, arguments may be singled out and
used to defend a variety of incompatible conclusions. Guha warns that
such is the case with arguments used by supporters of the deep ecology
movement. It does not happen only to supporters in the US. After a
speech in favor of taking the Barent Sea seriously as a whole complex
ecosystem, with living beings including the tiny flagellates having
intrinsic value, the politician considered the most powerful proponent
of big fishing interests is said to have remarked, "Naess is of course
more concerned about flagellates than about people." My point was that
the present tragic situation for fishermen could have been avoided if
policy makers had shown a little more respect for all life, not less
respect for people. In every such case one has reason to say that
communication on the part of the supporters of the deep ecology movement
was imperfect. In the above case I certainly should have talked more
about people than I did, but not to the exclusion of flagellates,
radiolarians and all the other life forms.

At the international conservation biology conference in Michigan in
1985, a representative of a Third World country stood up and asked,
"What about our problems?" Of course it was strange for this and other
representatives of the tropical countries to hear day after day
discussions on the future of biological processes in their countries
without touching the main social and economic problems facing them. If
the con-

ference had been organized by the green movement the agenda would have
been different. The discussions of how to deal with the ecological
crisis would have taken up only, let us say, one-third of the time. The
other two-thirds would have concerned mainly social problems ('social
justice', I would say) and peace. The representatives of the Third World
could have introduced the two latter areas of concern and could have
stressed that the efforts to protect what is left of the richness and
diversity of life on Earth must not interfere with efforts to solve
their main problems today.

People who are supporters of the deep ecology movement might have
brought in the following question for discussion:

How can the increasing interest in life on Earth be used to further the
cause of economic progress and social justice in the Third World?

Such questions will bring forth different, in part incompatible
proposals. Although we explore imcompatible proposals we must never lose
sight of the importance to all humans everywhere of preserving the
richness and diversity of life on the planet.

Resum√®

There is no antagonism between humans and wilderness. For hundred
thousand years humans have lived in wilderness without major
destructions. This state of affair may come back, but the question
arises: How much is then left? As protectors, industrial societies have
no credibility whatsoever. What these societies can do is to point out
that the aim of the poor, substantial economic growth measured by GNP
per capita, is not furthered by major destruction of wilderness - as was
the case when Europe and the USA destroyed nearly all of theirs. In the
interest of global sustainability and of economic progress of the poor,
the rich countries must in cooperation with the poor find a way to avoid
such destruction. Supporters of the deep ecology movement are active in
this project. Phrases like 'No more destruction of wilderness!' are
intended to apply to the rich countries. Destruction cannot suddenly
stop in the poor countries. How soon it can stop depends to a large
extent on the policies of the rich countries.

[1]

[2] Gary Synder, The Etiquette of Freedom, MS under publication, p.2.

[3] Quoted from a valuable survey of the wilderness issues: George
Sessions, "Ecocentrism, Wilderness, and Global Ecosystem Protection."
Under publication.

[4] R.Guha, "Radical American Environmentalism and Wilderness
Preservation: A Third World Critique", Environmental Ethics, 22, No.1,
1989, p.74.

[5] "In contrast to the conventional lobbying efforts of environmental
professionals based in Washington, it proposes a militant defense of
"Mother Earth", an unflinching opposition to human attacks on
undisturbed wilderness." (Guha, p.72)

[6] Quoted in G.Sessions, op.cit., p.22.

[7] In early (Norwegian) editions of my Ecology Community and Lifestyle,
I pressed some themes of the second component of the green movement, for
instance power decentralization, into the third, the ecological. This is
not difficult, but tactically unwise. It may stimulate unfruitful
debates and unnecessary quarrels about priorities.
