1992AE=1993.9

The Breadth and the Limitation of the Deep Ecology Movement[1]

Arne Naess

Resum√©

  The gist of what is said in the following may be expressed in 3
  sentences: to be joyfully active in the deep ecology movement is a
  serious affair. It is ethically unobjectionable not to combine it with
  being active in the peace movement and the social justice movement. We
  respect our partners in the Green movement, but have 'more than
  enough!' to do where we stand.

It is a never-ending joy to think of and to meditate on the existence of
a broad movement to protect the wild and free from thoughtless
interference by humans. It is a special joy to see how many people in
countries where they are primarily preoccupied with just to survive, but
nevertheless try to protect locally what is left of free nature.

They are, of course, always in a minority, wherever they are, but to be
aware of 'comrades in arms' locally and in so many countries helps to
reduce the feelings of sorrow or desperation that so easily take hold
when one contemplates the reigning passivity in the face of the
ecological crisis.

I shall never forget when I, together with a friend, travelled in 1949
through India and Pakistan with very little money to a mountain
bordering on Afghanistan. Because of the lack of money and the 500
pounds of climbing equipment and food, we inevitably came in close
contact with people who were very poor from the point of view of the
West. They asked us eagerly to make us explain what made us exert
ourselves and leave our country on a kind of pilgrimage. Again and again
it astonished us to see how well they understood our longings and it was
touching to hear them often say "How I would like to be with you!". In
more than 2500 years their culture had embraced a respect for the
greatness, dignity and wisdom of mountains and of the living beings
roaming the (at that time) the enormous Himalayan forests. But, of
course, what they could do was only to protect the patches of free
nature in their own neighborhood together with other activists. They had
no idea that the whole world was in danger.

How do the people today in materially poor countries react when we talk
about deep ecology? Using words that are common in their own culture, it
is encouraging to experience reaction like the following: 'But this is
what I always have felt!' It is not a question of majority reaction, but
a minority which I guess is not smaller than in the so-called rich
countries. Some are glad to get 'words' for what they feel, and that is
perhaps the best thing we can do, we who have been trained for years in
putting words on everything we feel. Theorists have an important
mission, helping each other in serious debates, and putting words to
things.

Many who support the deep ecology movement have never heard the term .
Most of them would feel bored if I, as a theoretician, talked to them in
lengthy clarifications about conceptual details, or they may soon get
impatient. But their effort in their 'life space' is consistent and
often able to restrain the galloping destruction that is going on in
their neighborhood. It is a strange belief that people who work hard to
survive are unable to feel the majesty of mountains, the inherent value
of forests and wild life, and to believe that they are more
'anthropocentric' than we are in the technocratic West.

In short, it is encouraging to experience that vast, intercultural roots
of deep ecology attitudes, and to see that they are alive among people
who focus on procurig life necessities, on narrow utilitarian goals.
There are other ways in which the deep ecology movement is broader than
sometimes suggested. People engaged in trade - in the poorer regions
mostly in the form of barter - look forward to communities where there
still is trade but more in their own taste, not always local, but also
crossing the Himalayas. Their utopias, or more modest expectations,
generally follow the direction of their own culture. Basic ecological
attitudes as part of cultural traditions different from those of the
rich West: engaged in a struggle for a better future, but with different
emphasis. The broadness of the deep ecology movement shows itself in the
variety of 'scenarios' envisaged by the supporters. It is for me
essential to keep up human cultural diversity as part of the richness
and diversity of life forms on Earth. But many supporters do not seem to
worry about the prospect of fairly uniform green societies all over the
globe. As I see it, ecological sustainability as an indispensible,
absolute requirement does not limit cultural diversity and
social-political structures within one single culture. The three great
movements each introduces limitation of the range of cultures (and
therefore of societies). The requirements overlap, but they are not
identical.

The deep ecology movement is in principle wide open for cultural
diversity, or ethnodiversity, in a more modern terminology. This is a
particular aspect of point 1 of the Naess-Sessions 8-point manifest.

Much meaningful work done in the rich countries is not done between 9 to
5, but rather between 5 and 9, or, in general, outside 'office hours'.
The three movements of outstanding importance in which work on the
grassroot level by hundreds of thousands of people is indispensible and
has had, and will have, I hope, considerable influence in world affairs:
the peace movement, the social justice movement and the radical
environmental movement. The name of the third movement I choose to
include not only the deep ecology movement, but also highly engaged,
activist, 'radical' supporters of more 'anthropocentric' views who have
the same serious view of the ecological crisis as the supporters of the
deep ecology movement.

Speaking about dynamic social movements, exact delimitation of the three
movements is of course out of the question, but historically much can be
said about what has happened since the Second World War in terms of
those three.

In the 50s, whe Third World problematics gained forces with, for
instance, 'trade, not aid' as a slogan, there was considerable pressure
to combine intimately the peace and the social justice movements into
one. Among the interesting views which helped this combination to take
effect is that of looking at social injustice as a sort of violence,
structural violence. The Norwegian peace researcher Johan Galtung's work
is central in this trend. The non-violent battle against large scale
violence then comprised both the 'classical' peace movement and a large
part of the social justice movement. It has turned out, however, that in
the long run people inspired by the vision of a world without wars had
more than enough work to do without direct participation in the vast
problematics of how to fight social injustice, including the whole
series of problems of distribution and imperialism. Pax Brittanica and
Pax Sovietica have shown how imperialism and other forms of obstructing
'self-realization potentials' over vast areas was compatible with
keeping peace. On the other hand activeness in typical social justice
conflicts may require one's energy and leave no room for activism in
matters of peace. The division of labor obviously does not result in
underestimation of the work of our friends in the other movements.

In recent decades millions of very poor people in Southeast Asia have
seen their standard of living significantly bettered. How can we but
rejoice? But the volume of interference with the ecosystems has
naturally increased. The prospect of a billion more people being rescued
from severe need does of course not automatically present a gain in
overcoming the ecological crisis. Leaders of the social democratic
regime often talk as if 'development' were part of the (smooth) way of
overcoming the crisis. This talk is politically convenient but utterly
misleading.

The empowerment of people in the West living in a most degrading way in
the midst of a level of opulence never equalled in world history (read
'in human recorded history of human societies') is an imperative and
more people are needed to try to change the shameful conditions. Some
supporters of the deep ecology movement may feel that they ought to join
and that may be the right thing for them to do. But they know, of
course, that the fight against the ecological crisis does not need less
people even if the shameful conditions are eliminated.

The inevitable, very ambitious, goal of the Green movement as conceived
in Europe since the late 60s, is to reach the goals of all three great
grassroot movements. No wars, social justice, full ecological
sustainability.

When students voted overwhelmingly green in the first green wave, they
were led by former anarchists, Marxists and peace activists. It implies
to support individual political parties and groups and others who exert
influence in the direction of green politics. In short, the Green
Movement is supposed to avoid onsidedness and sectarianism, letting the
three movements blossom and in constant close collaboration.

Collaboration does not imply extensive reading of all pertinent
literature and keeping informed about details of what is going on in the
two other movements. That tends to feed depression and despair. Reading
is passive and the information from all over the world is mostly
discouraging. You listen or read about seemingly indeterminable series
of setbacks, harassment of activists, encroachments by 'developments'.
Perhaps it is due to my European experience of being occupied by the
Nazis in 1940-45, but a persistent question is: 'How about the morale?
Can anything be done to keep it (the fighting spirit) at its highest
level?' The difference is that we now require truthful information
whereas in the war, this requirement would not be taken completely
seriously. In short, let us do our job as well as we can and rejoice
that others do theirs. Keeping in touch and sometimes acting together is
a surest way to keep the spirit.

[1] ¬†¬†¬†¬†Published in Wild Earth Spring 1993, pp.74-75.
