1993N

Support of the 'social' and the 'deep' ecology movements

Arne Naess

A.N.: Glad to see you. I have read a couple of things you have written
as a supporter the social ecology movement. I

am also a supporter of the social ecology movement.

B.N.: Are you kidding? We all class you as a deep ecologist!

A.N.: I have personally never called myself a "deep ecolo- gist". I am
not sure when I first saw that term used. It certainly worried me, and I
also lamented

my naivet√©. When introducing the three terms (a)

supporter of the deep and (b) the shallow, ecology

movement and (c) ecosophy, it was not foreseen that

the personification "deep ecologist" would be in-

troduced. A fourth term, "deep ecology" as a convenient abbreviation,
for instance in titles of articles, but that did not seem to do much
harm. So I am a supporter of the deep ecology movement, and for all I
know, you may be one.

B.N.: I am a supporter of the social ecology movement.

A.N.: I can't see that why you as a supporter of the social ecology
movement cannot be a supporter of the deep

ecology movement. I was lucky and got the opportunity to visit the
supporters of the social ecology movement in

the capital of Uruguay. The head of the group was a St.

Francis Christian. After reading and discussing the '8

points', - the tentative formulation of what the suppor-

ters of the deep ecology movement seem to accept on a

fairly general and abstract level - he said he certainly

could accept them. When getting to know how he and

his group collaborated with the poor people, especially

along the coast, and tried, among other things, to sup-

port and revive old ecologically sustainable practices,

I concluded that they were supporters of the deep eco-

logy movement. I have had similar experiences elsewhere. Why not say, if
asked, that they were supporters of the deep ecology movement? But at
least one member of the group in Uruguay had grave objections against
what "some deep ecologists" have written. I answered that, of course, I
also objected to what some people have said who use the term "deep
ecology" with acclamation.

B.N.: You make things unnecessary complicated. If somebody

votes in favor of the so-called "democratic party", he

is a democrat, in terms of political alliance. He sup-

ports the party. He decidedly does not support the "re-

publican" party.

A.N.: A certain Vidkun Quisling said during the Second World

War, when Norway was occupied by the Nazis, that he was

in favor of Norwegian independence from Germany, and he

seriously meant just that in spite of cooperating in a very friendly way
with the occupying power. The Norweg-

ian supreme court concluded after the war that Quisling

did not work for Norwegian independence. He was not con- ceived as a
supporter of the movement to get rid of Nazi domination. We are never
bound to accept the inference: if N.N. says he is a supporter of x, he
is a supporter of x.

Even if I consider seriously that N.N. is a supporter of

the deep ecology movement, I do not need to agree with

everything he says about the deep ecology movement. We

need disagreements as much as you need!

B.N.: I agree. Some people whom I would unhesitatingly call supporters
of the social ecology movement write strange

things about supporters of the deep ecology movement. Look here what
George Bradford writes on p.420 in Envi-

ronmental Philosophy[1]: "... deep ecologists apply eco- logical models
to everything, from the yearly emigrat-

ion of birds to the forced migrations of war refugees. Any reference to
social causes is met by accusations of "shallowness", ...."

A.N.: I suppose such things are written with a smile and meant

to tease and to offer an amusing caricature. There are no strong
arguments why a supporter of the social eco- logy movement cannot be a
supporter of the deep ecology movement. Point 6 of the 8 points of the
deep ecology movement which I have already referred to, emphasizes the
importance of social change. In order to implement vast changes in
societies, and primarily in the indus- trial ones, there must be
mobilization on the grassroot levels. If somebody tried to formulate
'the 8 points' of the social ecology movement, number 8 may, in analogy
with number 8 of the deep ecology movement, demand activism in favor of
the obectives of the movement. That clearly implies social activism in
favor of social changes which are necessary, but not sufficient to reach
wide ecological sustainability. (Some of those changes will in the short
run increase unsustainability.)

B.N.: But in that case, if the social ecology movement had an

activist requirement, you would not call yourself a supporter of the
social ecology movement? It is diffi-

cult to get time to be active in two movements.

A.N.: Yes. But something must be added to this 'Yes'. In two

of the three direct actions where I, and hundreds of others, permitted
ourselves to violate laws, and were

arrested, the objectives were planned as a combination

of deep ecology and social ecology - with emphasis on the social. In the
first case against the domination of

the power center of Norwegian society over the periphery

in terms of power. It was in favor of family farming in

a certain valley far from the power center. The object- ive was also to
save one of the most majestic waterfalls in Europe from being used for
city electricity, and to save the local water supply for the farms in
the valley. In the second case the dominating objective was the de-

fence of the interest of a fourth world people, the so-

called Lapplanders. (They don't like the name and wish

to be called 'the Sami people'.) A hydroelectric power

development threatened their reindeer traditions. The

deep ecology objective was to protest further increase

of electricity production. The people of the arctic

could get enough electricity from already 'developed'

rivers.

In the future I expect many direct actions organized

by one of the two movements will attract supporters of

both. Norwegian direct actions in the 70s and 80s were

of that kind, and we did not focus on terminology.

B.N.: But don't you think that there is something to it when

George Bradford in the concluding chapter of the book

Environmental Philosophy writes as follows: "But the

real question concerning society isn't whether ecolo- gical relations
underlie "human culture and its inter-

nal and external relationships", the question is whe-

ther ecological analysis is sufficient to explain hu-

man culture's history and conflicts...". The real question?

A.N.: I couldn't disagree more. Very few, and presumably not

any influential people, suffer from what in the last 20

years has been called 'ecologism'. The word is a parallel to
'psychologism' and 'sociologism'. Explaining everything within the frame
of reference of one single science, in the present case, ecology.

B.N.: You may be right. But some authors seem only to write

about ecological causes. They mislead.

A.N.: And you find that certain authors tend to talk only

about social causes and effects. We agree, I suppose.

[1]
