1993S

Interdependence, Internal Relations and Deep Ecology. A Note

Arne Naess

Thanks to the development of computers, theoretical economists can put
many more variables into their equations than before. Whereas the use of
70 variables was not unusual a couple of generations ago, the number of
variables now is staggering. What it means is that more and more
interdepen-dencies are not only recognized as probably operating in
society and internationally, but can be measured, if only in an
approximate and imperfect way.

What has been the attitude of theoretical economists since the 30s
towards an utterance like 'Everything is interrelated with everything
else'? So far as I can remember, my colleagues have tended to nod, they
have pointed out that as the number of variables grows, the average size
of each measured influence on the final results of calculations tend to
diminish. All the way towards zero.

The doubling of the number, n, of variables tend to affect the results
less and less. The economy of Norway or even of USA is perhaps
influenced by my behavior on the market. By shifting from one sort of
tea to another, or stopping to buy tea for a couple of years, it affects
from a purely theoretical, or abstract, conceptual, point of view, the
whole world market.

The economists don't take very seriously 'everything is connected with
everything else' because they are used to neglect numbers smaller than
'are of interest'. It may be numbers smaller than 0.1 or 0.01 or even
one to the power of minus 20, but there are always influences which they
believe are there, but completely uninteresting. Or influences which
safely can be said even to be strictly zero because of the physics of
finite interaction. The visual nerves in the eye excited by what NN sees
in the shop window W, crossing a street S at the moment tâ‚€, is not big
enough to bring any message from his eye to his brain. No prices on the
world markets are influenced by what NN saw, however many decimals are
used in the equations. A curious effect of such reflexions is a fairly
clear loss of theoretical excitement among theoretical economists when
they read our ecological slogan 'Everything is connected with everything
else'. They tend to think 'not in the economy' - there are always
thresholds limiting the reach of influence of 'small' events from the
economical point of view. There are events without any influence far
away.

For a physicist, the same applies because of the limited size of the
smallest possible burst of energy. The Planck

constant and other 'constants' limit interdependences. The writing of
the letter w in the second word of this sentence

will presumably have no influence on any quasar, even the nearest.

The limitation of interdependences does not decrease the usefulness of
slogans like 'everything is connected with everything else'. Ecology has
established some kinds of con-nections with great influence on phenomena
of great concern for mankind and the planet. These connections were
completely unknown until fairly recently. The discovery has made an
impact both in the reform and the deep ecology movements. It may be
doubted whether the discoveries have made much more direct impact in the
deep than in the reform movement. The decisive difference is rather the
way the insight has touched our emotions and has been made use of in our
lives. One may roughly sum up the difference by referring to two kinds
of utterances: "Sorry to say, we are dependent upon so and so", and
"Isn't it delightful how we all are interdependent?" In the deep ecology
movement through the process of strong identification also with beings
which are non-human, many interdependences are meditated upon with
delight, which within the reform movement are considered affectively
indifferent or even threatening.

The deep ecology movement is not characterized by accepting slogans such
as 'everything is connected with everything else', because this is often
accepted in the reform movement, but by how people react to what such a
slogan expresses, and how they make use of it. The basic positivity of
the reaction and the willingness, even delight, to take it into account
in our lives, is characteristic. The thought of being internally related
with the (so-called) environment is not considered strange and
threatening, but something in harmony with a deep seated emotionally
positive intuition. "This is what I always have felt, but not had words
for!" - a typical reaction.
