1993AJ

Professor Callicott:

A sometimes absent-minded supporter of the deep ecology

movement?

Arne Naess

1. There are authors and others who seem to me to be firm supporters of
the deep ecology movement, but who sometimes say or write things which
suggest they are not.

Professor J.Baird Callicott is one of them.

There are many promising ways to 'measure' the distance of views from
those which are characteristic of supporters of the deep ecology
movement. As could be expected I start with comparing what Callicott
writes with the formulations of the 8 points of the deep ecology
movement.[1]

Callicott scarcely has the opinion that all supporters of the deep
ecology movement think that "the whole of nature is the true self.". It
does not sound like a position taken by a theorist of the deep ecology
movement. I am myself such a theorist, but I do not feel at home with
the formulation. There is a sentence I often have made use of:
"Ultimately all living beings are one." It is a sentence I liked because
I feel there is something essential "we, the living beings", have in
common. I thought a television debate with Sir Alfred Ayer was a perfect
occasion to use the sentence and as could be expected, he declared it to
be wrong or absurd. (Reflexive Water, ed. Fons Elders, Souvenir Books
1974, p.31.) I do not today think that somehow all living beings
ultimately are one, but I still tend to focus on the biosphere rather
than ecosphere, especially if the latter is taken in a spatially wide
sense which makes it include the whole solar system or still more.

Supporters of the movement may have total views inspired in part by
reactions to the ecological crisis, such total views I have called
ecosophies. I call my own ecosophy T. Fortunately others have different
ecosophies. In a premise/ conclusion systematization I use,
'Selfrealization!' as a designation of one ultimate normative premise.
Some feel at home with this, others not. The 8 points could not possibly
contain such a norm.

Most firm supporters of the deep ecology movement would scarcely feel
they understand what possibly could be meant by "the whole of nature is
the true Self". Others would be clearly opposed to the kind of
metaphysics, advaita and others in which the sentence might fit in.
Callicot would be one of them. The opposition does not imply opposition
to other views characteristic of the ultimate premise level.

The metaphysical traditions which inspired Gandhi are of a lofty kind
which I respect, but the ultimate norm of my exposition of Ecology T,
'Selfrealization!', as it is explained there, recognizes a kind of
ultimate status of individual living beings. They are more than cells in
an organisms, more than drops in the ocean, more than leaves of a tree.
Advaita - not-two-ness - announces a radical unity.

Callicot seems to identify more or less my opinions with those of of
Mahatma Gandhi. He quotes from a section of my "Selfrealization. An
Ecological Approach to Being in the World", which I introduce by writing
"I do not defend all the views presented here: rather I primarily wish
to inform you about them." Later in that very section I write: "Gandhi
says: "I believe in advaita (non-duality). I believe in the essential
unity of man and, for that matter, all that lives. Therefore I believe
that if one man gains spirituality, the whole world gains with him and,
if ne man fails, the whole world fails to that extent."

Gandhi was not a philosophical scholar and he was personally able to
affirm advaita and at the same time maintaining a focus on the
individual. A strange combination. It shook the world when, as the
accused before the judge, Gandhi uttered, "The individual is the supreme
concern." He did not belong to the great mystics, neither do I belong to
the small ones. But various kinds of philosophical mysticism as 'level
1' views are certainly compatible with the 8 points.

"Scientific ecology will not support the claim that the self is in
reality the Self, that the individual is identical with the world" -
writes Professor Callicott. I might join him and add unreservedly that
support of that claim would mean the end of scientific ecology. Anyhow,
nobody has, as far as I know, found that the 8 points imply a kind of
nature mysticism. The many scientific ecologists who support the deep
ecology movement are scarcely nature mystics. Some are Buddhists, like
Professor Michael Soul√©.

In short, there is a richness of ultimate views of reality represented
among supporters of the deep ecology movement. Suppose we can formulate
the ultimate views of an ecosophy as a string of sentences. It is
required that a subset of these sentences express views from which the 8
points are derived. It is normally not the whole set which is required.
From some views on the ultimate level, the 8 points are derived. This is
part of my mode of deep ecology cognitive structures.

There is not a single expression in Professor Callicott's sentences
about deep ecology which suggests ill will, just a little
absentmindedness. For he seems to me to be a supporter of the deep
ecology movement.

One gets the impression from what Professor Callicott says on p.329 that
I introduced the term "shallow ecologists" in 1973. It was with deep
regret that I saw that term used and it made me support those who did
not like my term "shallow ecology" and preferred "reform ecology". But
later I delineate the difference in terms of deepness of premises from
which the supporter of the deep ecology argue, and their tendency to
accept the 8 points.

It is the impression of Callicott (p.330) that supporters of the deep
ecology movement are against environmental ethics. Some are doubtdul
about the force of moral injunctions ("moralizing"). I believe more in
the motivatinal force of what Kant calls "beautiful actions" that what
he calls "moral actions". The process of 'identifying' with others is
crucial in my view, but it does not mean that we lose individuality.

In social movements where people sometimes join in direct actions, we
discuss near and distant goals, whether in the grass-root movement or in
the deep ecology movement. We are sorry if it sometimes seems that we
discuss who is "and who is not an ideologically correct deep ecologist".

[1]
