1994AG

Sustainable Development and the Deep Ecology Movement[1]

Arne Naess

Let me first express my gratitude for being invited to be a participant
at an important European Union conference. After all, my country is not
a member of the Union and I am known to have been fighting against
Norwegian membership. Genuine friendship, yes, membership, no.

What I have to say falls into two parts. Firstly I describe the false
direction of present developments, then the role of the deep ecology
movement.

Both terms 'sustainable' and 'development' are today used generally as
plus words when we talk about communities, societies or states. Groups
with different policies to try to make them their own. Consequently the
terms are open to a confusing diversity of interpretations.

Sustainability as a goal is sometimes explicitly or implicitly limited
to the fairly shortsighted interests of one species, the human species.
The deep ecology movement focusses on the long term defense of life
conditions on Earth - 'full ecological sustainability'. For instance, in
the many conflicts between animals and humans concerning territory, the
limitation of concern only for humans would go against the long term
interests of both humans and animals.

There is a tendency today, even among politicians - who have no animal
voters - to call for respect for all other living beings. But they often
complain that only a minority of people feel that way. The question of
how far one should go in our concern for the richness and diversity of
life, will always give rise to different views. Supporters of the deep
ecology movement go far, but no extreme views are implied. The movement
is broad and is realistic when it comes to practical applications.

General sustainable development I take by definition to imply continuity
over generations without very severe negative consequences. This implies
ecological sustainability as one aspect of general sustainable
development. The opinions about what would constitute a very severe
consequence will naturally differ. Some would only reckon catastrophes
severely hitting humans as very severe consequences. That is, if what is
obviously useful for humans is saved, but the richness and diversity of
life on Earth may be very severely damaged; there is still ecological
sustainability. Supporters of the deep ecology movement ask for a high
degree of protection of life conditions in general: no more interference
than is necessary in order to satisfy human vital needs; the term
'vital' being interpreted wider than 'basic'.

It is not enough that there is a demand on the market for some kind of
products. We should ask: How much can safely be produced by the human
population when we have several thousand million more people to offer
decent material standard, and how should they be produced. ("Energy
efficiency!") An ethical axiom says: Don't live a life you cannot
seriously wish that also others might live, if they wish to live that
way. It is an axiom of universalizability. Can we seriously wish people
in India and China to live our wasteful Western life? No, obviously not,
and we cannot leave it to our children to face the ensuing problems
realistically. We must change our lives, and let the poor improve their
material standard of living. The necessary investment, increase year by
year. We in the rich countries must start now to change policies,
downscaling material production for ourselves.

We can only support economic growth, that is, production, if consumption
of what is produced happens outside the rich countries.

There is no sure gain in development without a gain in the direction of
ecological sustainability. Since the 1960s there has been enough
information to make it clear that the rich nations are moving in the
direction of increasing, not decreasing ecological unsustainability. The
per capita negative influence on life conditions has so far been small
in the Third World, but especially in Southeast Asia, a false kind of
change in our direction, is rapidly taking place. The book Limits to
Growth published by the Club of Rome in 1972 was important. Beyond the
Limit published by the same authors 20 years later is not less
important, but much less read. The 'Green backlash' started in the 80s:
a swarm of organizations, most far right politically, try to stop,
weaken or repeal environmental legislation and efforts in general.
Beyond the Limits shows that those curves illustrating present global
development which should rise point downwards, and those which ought to
point downwards rise. It is not only curves such as that showing COâ‚‚
emission increases and ozone defects in the atmosphere, but an
indisputable increase of erosion and decrease of arable land and of
forests.

All over the world we see the scramble to pass from low material
standard of living to the false kind of high standard we have in the
richest countries. Why false? What I refer to is the wasteful use of
energy, increasing production of goods not used to satisfy vital needs,
population not kept stable or decreasing. Instead of the false avoiding
the direction lof development in the rich countries, the nations of
Eastern Europe even neglect the few good aspects of life among the rich.
In the Scandinavian countries, bicycling to work is common. In Danish
cities you see big parking lots for bicycles. In Sweden you one may ride
one's bike on special lanes through all cities. New kinds of bicycles
make their use in Norwegian hilly regions very comfortable. In the
Eastern European countries, bicycling is more rare. People make the
transition straight from walking to private driving. In Warsaw and many
other cities bicycling is by now too dangerous for most people and of
course there are rarely any special lanes.

This is only an example. Rich countries' trade and our tourism encourage
the false direction of development. But we may change our policies,
showing clearly that we try to go for a decreased level of material
standard of living, but keeping or improving our life quality.

In 1988 the World Watch Institute estimated that it would require,
calculated in dollars, the investment of a yearly sum of 149 (American)
billion dollars to start a worldwide decrease of unsustainability.
Factors included decreasing erosion, decreasing deforestation and
increasing reforestation, stopping the trend towards diminishing the
area of good soil, decreasing energy waste, and a couple of other items.
Conclusion: ecological sustainability is still obtainable through an
investment is only a fraction of the investment in advertizing. But
every year the cost, or better, the necessary investment, in future life
conditions, increases exponentially.

Now, what is the deep ecology movement? Something quite new started in
the 60s - an international concern about the threats to life conditions
on Earth through chemicals. The hostile reactions of the chemical
industry, in close cooperation with the U.S. Department of Agriculture,
started even before Rachel Carson published her famous book Silent
Spring in 1963. The book made evident the dangers of the heavy use of
pesticides. Within a few years environmental legislation started. To an
astonishing degree grassroot participation in the struggle was able to
move the politicians. Later in the 1960s Europe woke up and we got a
truly international environmental, or better, ecological movement. But
with President Reagan and British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher a
counter-movement sprang up which still is very strong, the so-called
"Green backlash".

It seems that without the enthusiastic participation of a sizeable
minority of people environmental policies leading to global sustainable
development is unobtainable. Politicians must be sure that courageous
environmental initatives are met with goodwill at the polls. They are
not sure today.

It was clear already in the 60s that those who participated in the
international environmental movement looked upon their work in different
ways. There are two terms which often are used to define the difference
in spite of their being slightly misleading: the 'anthropocentric' and
the 'ecocentric' or 'biocentric' view. The former is more or less
completely motivated by the threats to humans, their health and their
need to enjoy unspoiled nature. Many people find that this priority of
fellow humans makes it natural to say they are anthropo- or human-
centric rather than 'centering' on ecosystems, life conditions for
living beings in general. My conclusion: it is better to avoid talk
about a center, because many those who steadily talk about the threats
to humans nevertheless support radical protection of other life forms on
Earth, whatever their "usefulness" for humans. And so-called ecocentrics
may insist that we have very special responsibilities and obligations
towards fellow humans. Supporters of the deep ecology movement are
mostly conceived to be firmly ecocentric, but, of course, affirm the
very special obligations we have towards fellow humans. They may be
pressing for elimination of extreme hunger and oppression just as much
the so-called anthropocentrics.

As I see it, supporters of the deep ecology movement essentially ask for
extended and deepened care for humans as well as non-humans. But what is
fairly new is the vivid expression of deep concern for non-humans.

The deep ecology movement does not subscribe to the view that if one
cares for other beings than fellow humans, there is less left for the
humans - as if care was handed out from a small container. The term
"deep" in the name "deep ecology" refers to deepness of premises
motivating the supporters - and the deepness of the social changes
necessary to overcome the environmental crisis.

In order to characterize the deep ecology movement one has to, of
course, use more than two terms. What follows is a c.200-word
characterization, the so-called "deep ecology 8 points. They express
fairly general and abstract views which all or nearly all supporters
accept. In detail the views may be formulated somewhat differently. Here
is a recent version:

1. Every living being has intrinsic or inherent value.

2. Richness and diversity of kinds of living beings have intrinsic or
inherent value.

3. Humans have should not reduce this richness and diversity except to
satisfy vital human needs.

4. The flourishing of human life and cultures is compatible with a
decrease of the human population. The flourishing of non-human life
requires such a decrease.

5. Present human interference with the non-human world is excessive, and
the situation is worsening.

6. Policies must be changed in view of points 1 to 5. These policies
affect basic economic, technological and ideological structures.

7. The appreciation of a high quality of life will supercede that of a
high standard of living.

8. Those who accept the foregoing points have an obligation to try to
contribute directly or indirectly to the implementation of necessary
changes.

The expressions 'intrinsic" and "inherent" value in points 1 and 2 are a
source of debate. My own interpretation is most clear when we talk about
beings that may be said to have or show preference or interests. When we
say 'Do it for its (or his or her) own sake!', 'It was done for its
(his, her) own sake', or when we in comparable situations use the term
'for its own sake' as contrasted with for the sake only of something
else. This is a sufficient ground for attributing value in itself to
what we speak about. I refrain from any professional philosophic
analysis, I talk as a mere supporter of the deep ecology movement among
thousands of others.

The firm acceptance of the two first points of the platform is of
considerable social and political importance: as long as major efforts
to protect, and as far as it is still possible, to restore richness and
diversity of life on Earth, are argued solely on the basis of narrow
utilitarianism, they will be piecemeal. Cost-benefit analysis is here
difficult. It can scarcely be carried out with maximal perspective space
and in time. Without respect for the biosphere as a whole, efforts will
continue to be focussed on special spectacular items, pandas, wolves,
acid rain, the ozone layer, COâ‚‚, ... . Respect for the planet as a whole
facilitates acceptance of long range efforts including appropriate
changes of human societies. Ecologically sustainable development will
automatically refer to the whole planet and not to ecologically arbitary
boundaries of nations.

The terms 'life' and 'living' as used need comments.

When a campaign with the aim to protect a river against so-called
development is launched, the slogan 'Let the river live!' did not
concern the Hâ‚‚O of the river, but a somewhat vaguely conceived ecosystem
as a whole - a 'living' whole including people who did not interfere,
the Sami (Lapland) people. It included people who lived along the river
and used the river in an ecologically responsible, sustainable way. This
broad ecologically inspired way of interpreting the term 'life' of a
river is important when forming strategies of conservation of resources.
It is clear that most campaigners for the protection of a river against
major interference do not only have narrow usefulness in mind, but feel
the interference to touch or reduce the meaning of their own lives.
People try to protect a vital need for meaning and what is necessary to
maintain that meaning. A development which is expected to reduce that
meaning is not sustainable. We are led to a concept of sustainable
development for this satisfaction of human needs which protects the
planet also for its own sake.

Philosophers who are dubious about the notion of 'right' propose its
elimination, for instance using the phrase "humans should not..."
instead of "humans do not have the right to...". The postulation of
certain 'human rights' has a positive influence today. As long as the
term is used in this connection, it might also be used to refer to
non-humans.

Some say that humans can have rights because they have obligations.
Animals don't have obligations, therefore they have no rights. Such a
limitation of the meaning of 'rights' is not found in everyday use of
the term, however. Examples: rights of lunatics and of small children.

The acceptance of point 3 does not, strictly speaking, depend on the
acceptance of the existence of rights of humans and non-humans. If a
mother says to her son, "You have no right to prevent your little sister
from eating all her birthday cake", this does not imply any doctrine of
rights of sisters to eat. There is an important everyday usage of the
expression 'no right to' which has to do with injustice and related
phenomena. The same applies to 'no right to' in the formulation of point
3.

Not included in the 8 points, but quite expressive of opinions among
supporters of the deep ecology movement is the following formulation:
'Every living being has the right to live and flourish'. Logically
perhaps more satisfying: 'There is a right that every living being has:
the right to live and flourish'.

Anyhow, if one dislikes the expression "does not have the right to", the
somewhat weaker "should not, ethically speaking", is at our disposal.

The gigantic gross national product of the rich industrialized states is
unfortunately a measure of a gigantic pollution and waste with doubtful
gain for human life qulaity. It was already in the 60s called Gross
National National Pollution, GNP. In short, an increase in GNP does not
guarantee an increase in the satisfaction of vital needs. This fact is
painfully obvious in poor countries where increases so far have had
little influence among the desperately poor.

Where to draw the limit between vital and non-vital needs is a question
that must be related to local, regional and national particularities.
Even then a certain area of disagreement must be taken as normal.

There are two points of the deep ecology movement platform which have
occasioned lively discussion, points 4 and 6. Point 4 was originally
worded like this: "A decrease of world population would be good for
humans, and very good for non-humans." The term 'decrease of humans'
caused strong negative feelings: the memory of Hitler and of people
publishing hostile utterances about humanity seem to have caused a
shudder. People in the poor countries might mistakenly imagine that
point 4 points primarily at them. Already in the 70s it was usual to say
something like "There are not too many now, but it would be good to
stabilize the number at the present level." People who in 1970 said ths
tend to say the same today, thereby avoiding the term 'decrease'.

Objections to point 4 is often made on the basis of the view that a
quick decrease is ethically objectionable, and that if many centuries
are needed, the point is without interest. As I see it, many centuries
are needed, but it is nevertheless important to have it in mind in city
planning and many other long range enterprises. Some believe that a
decrease will hurt the economy. Not many economists discuss how to
maintain good economic conditions under very slow decrease, for instance
a quarter of a per cent yearly. Assuming conditions are otherwise
stable, economists make us aware of the following excellent
consequences: per capita real capital increases, per capita natural
resources increase, interference in the ecosystems and crowding
decrease.

These consequences hold good in abstract generality, but in practical
life will depend on local and regional peculiarities. When discussing
the per capita interference with the ecosystems it is of prime
importance to stress that in the last couple of centuries the industrial
countries have caused very much more destruction than the non-industrial
countries. A hundred babies born in Bangladesh may cause less
interference than one single baby born in a rich country.

Point 6 has caused lively discussions because it has been widely held
that new technologies will make it possible for all people to reach the
material affluence of the present rich countries without catastrophic
consequences. "Business as usual! But new technologies are needed."
Since 1960, however, many promising inventions have been made, solar
energy technology is an instance. But whether inventions will be used on
a sufficiently great scale depends upon social and political factors.

How do supporters of the deep ecology movement react to concrete
ecological problems such as that of global warming? They tend to agree
with the International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) that without great
changes of policies, the warming is unavoidable. And they support any
drastic change of policies necessary, insisting that they need not
reduce life quality. The warming is due to the excesses of the rich
nations and the worst consequences of continuing present policies will
hit the Third World. It is the clear duty of the richest countries to
cooperate much more intensively with the poor to counteract those
consequences. In general the realization of ecological sustainability in
the Third World is dependent on the cooperation of rich and poor.
Present effort is symbolic rather than realistic.

The supporters of the deep ecology movement are for investments of
considerable scope because their philosophy of life is of a kind that
the devastation they see now reduces their own life quality. The role of
the supporters is important because they actively work for change of
strong policies and because politicians can always count on their
enthusiastic endorsement of plans which are radical enough to reduce
present increasing unsustainability.

Extensive free markets and a development towards an 'enterprise culture'
create conditions favorable to a deepening of ecological
unsustainability. The average distances travelled by humans and the
volume of trade and prevalent conceptions of 'economic growth' are
negative factors. Negative not in the sense that such factors
necessitate increasing ecological unsustainability but they make it
harder to avoid. There is within the deep ecological movement a clear
tendency to be open for considerably different views about the economics
and politics of how to overcome the ecological crisis. But there is an
agreement that the way to go is democratic and non-violent. Important
publications are written in the spirit of the deep ecology movement -
without using its terminology.

One of the great obstacles facing the rich countries, including some in
the European Union, is the mobility explosion and the availability of
fossil fuels at absurdly low prices. The average mumber of kilometer
travelled per capita shows an exponential curve. The same applies to the
transport of goods. Technical advances which decrease the pollution per
kilometer cannot keep up. The vaster the markets in square kilometers,
the greater mobility must be expected if not strong, unpopular measures
are introduced. The violent increase in trade over long distances
creates problems which are of course well known to environmental experts
in the European Union.

So far it seems impossible to mobilize efforts to gaind sustainable
development within, let us say, the next 30 years. When the concept of
the Four Freedoms was introduced, it was not always foreseen that their
implementation might cause considerable environmental complications.
There was a tendency to view any increase in trade as a plus, whereas a
more moderate view is to warn against what may be called "excess"
trading. Recently there was an international conference in New York
considering negative consequences of the globalization of the economic
system. It is to be expected that supporters of the deep ecology
movement take these consequences seriously.

It is not the view of what in political philosophy is often called Green
political theory that the main political problem of the next century is
that of decreasing ecological unsustainability. There are two other
problem areas: those of peace and the elimination of extreme poverty and
suppression, including the use of torture. It is a great goal to make
everybody in the rich countries active in support of a movement in favor
of solving the three main largely political problems! Each country, and
power constellations like the European Union, must contribute in
relation to their resources.

A distinction between Green and green political theory runs parallell to
that of the reform movement and the deep ecology movement. The Green
theorists foresee the need for greater policy changes. I would mention
three influential books on green political parties: The well established
economist Hazel Henderson published already in 1981 her The Politics of
the Solar Age. Prepresenting 'green' political parties Jonanthan Porritt
published his Seeing Green: the Politics of Ecology Explained and
Fritjof Capra and Charlene Spretnak, Green Politics, both in 1984. A
main difficulty which Green politicians meet is that of integrating
Green political proposals in a general political framework. A Green
politician must have general political credibility - credible opinions
about every small political subject of the day.

Outstanding among Green political theorists I am glad to say is a woman,
Robyn Eckersley. Her Environmentalism and Political Theory 1992, is
level-headed but it insists that policies must change significantly.
Three other authors I think should be mentioned, Robert C.Paehlke,
Environmentalism and the Future of Progressive Politics. The term
"progress" may evoke memories of the red/blue political axis of the time
of the Soviet Union, but rather faintly. The term "radical
environmentalism" is generally avoided because of the misleading
association with that axis. Supporters of the deep ecology movement very
rarely, or not at all, have opinions characteristic of the far left or
far right.

The two other authors that might be mentioned, Andrew Dobson, Green
Political Thought, 1990, and John Dryzek, Rational Ecology, 1987. The
latter title is well chosen: it focusses on the irrationality of
politics which ignores the complete dependence of humanity upon natural
conditions and the rationality of taking the future seriously.

As could be expected every Green theorist favors democratic regimes. The
necessary changes are much too complex for any dictatorial management.
They need active cooperation in wide circles of the population. In
addition the theorists reject authoritarianism for reasons of ethics.
But nobody knows what will happen politically if countries are faced
with ecological catastrophes on a grand scale. Some people reason that
"fascism" of some kind will appear, or authoritarian measures by the
powerful, rich countries trying to impose ecologically strong policies
in poor areas of the world. It is often said that pollution "knows no
borders", but it is clear that winds and other forces lead to wide
distribution of pollution. As to climatic changes each country tends to
calculate what changes will large benefit and what changes may have
largely negative influences.

Most of the thousands of people engaged in studies on climatic changes
are interested in specialised research, not in philosophical inquiry
about life. If may sound absurd, but some people who talk critically
about the deep ecology movement believe that its supporters find it to
be a serious drawback that researchers on climate and in other
ecological, scientific occupations do not take up questions of
philosophical and political foundations. But we are of course grateful
that work of great importance is carried out. The general ecological
movement needs competent people in a myriad of questions.

It has been said that the 8 points of the deep ecology movement open the
possibility for "fascist" interpretations. Some versions of point 1 may
be interpreted in such a way that the individual living beings,
including individual humans, do not have inherent value. To counteract
this possibility I have proposed that point 1 be re-formulated, for
instance, this way: "Every living being has inherent value", that is, it
makes sense to do something purely for its own sake. Point 2 will then
attribute inherent value to the manifold of life on Earth.

Lastly, Point 8 may end with the adverbs "democratically and
non-violently". There are no theorists who envisage the use of violent
means, but critics may point to its theoretical possibility.

In short, there is no place for "fascist interpretations". Imputations
in this direction must be expected, however, as long as there is a
"green backlash" - the efforts to get rid of environmental legislation
and non-governmental implementation of policies in the direction of
ecological responsbility.

The basic function of the terminology of the deep ecology movement is to
facilitate the formulation of policies which reach deep enough to ensure
a global change from increasing to decreasing ecological
unsustainability. But also, a set of principles that is broad and
undogmatic enough to function as a rallying point for groups of widely
different views on the causes of the crisis. There is room for people
who wish to emphasize the masculinity as the major cause of the
ecological crisis, and there is room for those who insist on the
relevance of human domination of humans as a cause of human "domination"
also over nature.

[1] Â Â Â Â ^(?)Presentation at Conference on 'Sustainable Development',
21-23 October 1994, Crete, Greece.
