1995S

Some comments on the MS 'Is Theory Innocent? The Case of Deep Ecology'

Arne Naess

The deep ecology movement (d.e.m.) is intended to affect basic traits of
contemporary societies, especially the rich ones, including their
prevalent ideology of consumerism. (Point 6 of the 8 points.) The change
in ideology is tentatively summed up in point 7. "The ideological change
is mainly that of appreciating life quality ... rather than adhering to
an increasingly higher standard of living..."

Any description of d.e.m. which considerably inflates the ideological
scope of it beyond those two points I consider misconstrued. In the cold
war there was much talk of the new man, the "communist man". A central
point of the MS is a conception of a severely inflated d.e.m. bordering
on the introduction of a "deep ecology human". Such a human is sometimes
said to be puritanical, avoids luxury etc. But a supporter of the d.e.m.
may of course exceptionally fond of luxury, a concept that is defined in
relation to everyday life.) The MS shows that the limitation of the
scope of d.e.m. has not been expressed clearly often enough. A recent
article of mine, specifically about the limitation of d.e.m., has not
yet been published.

A severe extension of the scope is at hand when in the MS the term
"affect" in point 6 is not taken heed of. If, and only if, the point is
construed as asking for a change of all basic traits of contemporary
democratic societies, the utopian, and potentially evil characteer of
d.e.m., must be seriously considered. How might a society be which
resulted in changing all basic traits of present democracies? I don't
know and the question is irrelevant.

The hard core of conceptions of a Green society - using the now current
distinction between 'green' (shallow or reform) and 'Green' - is a
society that is ecologically sustainable. I belong to those who add two
serious additional requirements: a significant advance of the peace
movement and the movement to eliminate severe poverty and suppression.

It is a good thing to repeat a warning against neglecting close scrutiny
of any movement that seems to require a change of basic human traits.
Not only national socialist and fascist movements but also many minor
prophetic movements illustrate the near certainty of the development of
severe authoritarianism and within the frame of such movements - even if
they sometimes start without clear signs of such developments and
consequences. I agree with the authors that the formidable intended
scope of such movements prevents them from being "innocent" in the sense
they suggest.

Considering the vastness of the scope they attribute to the d.e.m., the
conclusion of the MS is excellent: the supporters of the deep ecology
movement must express explicitly and clearly how they avoid developments
of anthoritarian character in the very long run. More specifically how
to avoid punitive measures against what the authors humorously call The
Shallow those who enjoy extremely 'unecological' behavior. Implicit is
here (the utopian?) assumption that the supporters of the d.e.m. gain
considerable political power of the kind that makes suppression of a
substantial minority possible for them.

If we compare the number of daily public stimulations to avoid what
requires economic efforts to the number of stimulations to mobilize
economic efforts, perhaps we find that there are a thousand times more
stimulations in favor of the effort. We must invade advertizing with
humorous and entertaining items with an appeal of an opposite tendency.

My remarks so far are likely to be judged as rhetorical ones stressing
my reform rather than my radical views - soothing remarks. But it is
radical to seriously ask for higher estimation of life quality than
standard of living. It affects how children are brought up: much more
guidance by parents and schools to make child experts using and enjoying
material things of which there is enough for all. Such as, in Norway,
free nature (and enough for 4 million people). As it is now little is
done in order to make children fairly dependent of rushing to the
shopping malls. More than ever, advertizing targets children. Not very
long ago teenagers were discovered as a formidable source of sales. That
is, it was discovered to what unexpected degree both small children and
teenagers could be made to want things of which there is not enough for
all, things which have a price on the market. In short, to affect any
change in education within the family and in schools, in the direction
of promoting life quality rather than continuing the present level of
material consumption, is a great task. A 'revolutionary' task in the
wide sense of a task that never has been made before, social policies
which conflict with gigantic economic interests.

I have only mentioned education. There is a formidable task only
recently started to influence our system of economics along the
coordinate from blue to green. To avoid looking upon any increase of
sales as a plus for the social economy, the economic 'health' of the
community. The task ahead affects every basic aspect of society. But
this does not imply that every aspect has to change, including formal
rules of democratic institutions, for instance, those of justice.

Furthermore, it does not imply eliminating greed, eliminating
conspicuous consumption, the desire for luxury etc. Rich life, simple
means! Luxury? Of course, but within the framework of ecologically
sustainable policies.[1] Today, to own a luxurious motor boat bought for
one million dollars creates prestige and envy within many circles in the
rich countries. In a green society the same degree of prestige and envy
may be created by a less luxurious motor boat as judged by our standard.
What today's rich would count as moderate will be classified as
luxurious. Hopefully styles may change, therefore I say "would count",
not "is counted": the future boats will be different in design and of
course, ecologically economical. Conspicuous consumption will continue
even when life quality has gained as a goal.

The vision of green societies where phenomena we as greens do not
cherish still exists, does not imply a transition from radical to
moderate views.

There is, as I (naturally) see it, no inconsistency between the reform
Naess and the radical Naess, and (what is far more interesting) between
d.e.m. theorists reform utterances and revolutionary utterances. What
dominates today may still exist in Green societies.

A critical point: the supporters of the d.e.m. cooperate every day with
the active supporters of the shallow or reform movement. The former are
completely dependent upon the latter, and the latter are moderately, but
significantly, assisted by the former. Consider climate Most people
doing such research are scarcely motivated by philosophy or religion in
choice of problems. They may be active in the ecological movement,
explaining dangers of climatic changes, pointing out health risks, often
they focus on the consequences for the rich, rather than the poor
countries, for instance consequences for Holland.

Some activists within the shallow or reform movement consider work in
ecophilosophy unprofitable, unnecessary and a blind alley. They make
jokes about it. But their work is from the point of view of d.e.m.
indispensable. If or when the ecological crisis is overcome, historical
accounts will naturally focus on the function of a people with rather
different attitudes.

The scenario envisaging pressure from a victorious group of supporters
of d.e.m. to intimidate other activists, using power of the sort we
today see in a great number of authoritarian states is a curious one,
rests on extremely unlikely hypotheses. We need to consider the sinister
chances of dictatorship if the ecological crisis gets completely out of
hand, but the pressures will be directed directly against violations of
harsh, strict rules concerning pollution and other activities causing
ecological unsustainability, not against lack of philosophical or
religious motivation. It is difficult for me to imagine people being put
in prison for holding views supporters of the deep ecology movement
class as shallow or reformist.

People detesting frugality, detesting simple means, may find it
necessary to work extremely hard because of a high price level of what
their lifestyle demands. With 10,000 million people and, hopefully, a
decent distribution of resources, as is foreseen in Green societies, the
size of the personal Gaia gift - the gift of interference in the
eocsystems - must be expected to be smaller than today. Joys which do
not cause big interference will be more seriously considered than today.

Inconsistency, inconsistency, inconsistency! Among the 10 most virulent
accusations, or rather, admonishments of inconsistency, I choose to
consider perhaps the oldest: that concerning so-called 'biospherical
egalitariansim'. Supporters of d.e.m. are said to be or tend to be in
favor of - let us call it the BE. As defined by me when I introducied
it, it is something not more radical than the 8 points. Every living
being has in common (presumably among other things) one and the same
kind of value, the intrinsic, or, perhaps better, the inherent value.
The kind of value is the same for all of them. Almost all species of
organisms have to kill plants or animals in order to 'live and blossom'.
It is certainly a vital need for them to do so. Consequently the kind of
value we speak about is certainly not a value such that it is always
ethically wrong to kill a living being. Those who eat bread kill
millions of living beings, at least if the bread is made in
old-fashioned ways. The equality (egalit√©) is that of having intrinsic
value, and have a kind of right, the right to live and blossom.

This point I thought was important enough to give an atrociously long
value-laden name, 'biospherical egalitarianism'. But many readers seem
to think that the name ought to name a much more radical and completely
intenable, view. It is like interpreting "democracy" as the direct rule
of everybody about everything.

An article in Environmental Ethics (Spring 1995, Vol.17, No.1) has the
title "Against Biospherical Egalitarianism". The author interprets the
term in such a way that if a mosquito places itself on the nose of your
baby, clearly intending to draw the blood necessary for producing
offspring, you are not supposed to kill or disturb it, at least not in
malaria free countries. The mosquito is your equal!

Some theorists of deep ecology may introduce a hierarchy of inherent
value, announcing norms of this sort 'Living beings of the kind K‚ÇÅ have
higher inherent value than those of K‚ÇÇ.' This is not my way. I introduce
an ethics of a hierarchy of obligations. A father has a duty - if he is
able to do it - to kill the world's last tiger if that is the only way
to prevent his child from dying of hunger. The norm-conflicts in this
area is without end, but unfortunately education even at the university
level does not give the pertinent question higher priority.

This was a detailed discussion of one single example of consistency open
to charges of inconsistency. But when we use expressions with slogan
functions we may easily get into trouble.

Rawls' metaphor of an original position is a wonderful way, as I see it,
to carry further the principle used in philosophy of law, thinking de
lege ferenda, not only de lege lata, law giving, not only hermeneutics
of laws already given. 'Treat equal cases equally!'. This is supposed to
be a completely general norm. There may be, and must be, conflicts
wether two caes C‚ÇÅ and C‚ÇÇ are equal, but the principle of universality
must be honored. It rules out every kind of privilege, respecting every
interest of the members of the community.

Rawls' metaphor has been recently discussed in Environmental Ethics by
various authors. There and in a lecture by Jon Wetlesen, a broadening of
initial ignorance is proposed. Not only must there be members who
represent small children and the mentally handicapped, but also
representatives of animals, for instance of animals who are treated
badly or even tortured in the interests of humans, and kinds of animals
threatened with extinction, their habitats being destroyed. It is a good
idea that we must imagine that we are animals used in painful
experiments, the fate of forests and the animals dependent upon forests,
and so on.

Principles of justice have been implied or presupposed in d.e.m.
literature. When it has not been made explicit, the main reason is
fairly obvious: the answers to pertinent questions of justice are
expected to be found in the philosophy of law and of politics in the
Western democratic traditions. Scandinavian literature comprises
advanced articles[2] and I have personlly learnt from the sophisticated
hermeueutic aspects. The fascist abberations have uniformly been looked
upon with abhorence among theorists. To single out what our authors call
'The Shallows' and refuse to take care of their interests, but be
conscious of those of squirrels, would indeed be strange. By 'The
Shallows' is meant the (presumably majority) of members of society who
wish to live a life far from what the slogan 'rich life, simple means'
suggests, for instance, feeling better with a slogan like 'to go to hell
on first class'. I fancy some people will use their total annual Gaia
gift in January, and rely on getting part of the gift meant for their
close friends.

"I have unfortunately absolutely no money left. I have to pay interest
on my loan, you know I bought a wonderful million-dollar car! May I join
you at your dinner table? I am awfully hungry."

It is to be expected that some people in green societies would look back
with envy - how a moderately successful businessman or woman could have
his or her fabulous boat using 50 gallons of gas an hour! In a Green
society some people will certainly get into trouble through their urge
to live beyond their means. Hopefully they will be rescued from going
all the way to hell on first class, whatever that would mean. Suicide?

From the very beginning of the proponents of greener society have had a
guideline in mind: not more regulations, but fewer and stronger. This is
one of the reasons why one must admit that Green theorists borrow some
guidelines from the red and some from the blue political traditions.
There are in Norway today a great number of ecologically motivated
regulations. When supporters of d.e.m. speak about regulations, they
have such ones in mind, continuing the democratic tradition of how to
formulate them. When, for instance, higher gasoline prices are
discussed, the discussion includes, of course, reference to consequences
for the groups of people affected most severely. What can be done to
make the regulations just? The criteria of justness are fortunately
fairly stable. With fiercer regulations such discussions gain in
importance.

[1] "... Norway 2084"

[2] An example: √ò.Seippel and O.Langhelle: "Gr√∏nn politisk teori, noen
internasjonale bidrag", in Alternativ Framtid, No.1, 1994.
