1996AA

The Deep Ecology House at Skansen

Arne Naess

There are unfortunately too few entrepreneurs today who both understand
and creatively apply the new way of conceiving man's relation to nature
and to life conditions of our planet. It should be obvious that in the
next centuries thousands of millions of people will have to live in a
deeply different way than today in our rich countries. There is no lack
of knowledge about the unsustainability of the present ways of living,
what is urgently needed are large scale applications. But before that
there must be plenty of experiments showing ways to proceed. The
EcoCyclic House at Skansen provides an example of exceptional
importance. I call it a deep ecology house because deep ecolgy insists
on the necessity of significant changes of all main aspects of modern
societies. Housing is one aspect and the EcoCyclce House illustrates in
an excellent way how ecological sustainability can be achieved.

Unfortunately the visions of a "green" ecological sustainable society
tend to avoid modern technology. The Ecocycle House shows that a number
of recently developed techniques are useful in ecologically responsible
housing.

Jan Ã˜quist and Bengt Warne are the two names central in this enterprise.
With the former I have enjoyed cooperation since 1975. His combination
of artistic and scientific imagination is certainly rare.

Why Ecocycle House in the Stockholm area? It is quite clear that Sweden
belongs to the few countries where one can expect that pioneer
undertakings manifesting ecosophy - wisdom related to ecology - will
appear. But there is nothing specifically Swedish in the design of the
house, it is clear that it is meaningful, placed in a great variety of
countries and climates. The rich international relations of Sweden
guarantees that the existence of the house will get to be known world
wide.

In Norway my institution and many others will be interested in the
further development in Sweden. What is needed is parallel developments
on a large scale.
