1998U

What would be "extreme deep ecology"?

Arne Naess

In every social movement one may introduce a distinction, sometimes
slightly arbitrary, between moderates and extremists, or between
moderate and extreme views. For reasons some of which are not difficult
to guess, extreme views among deep ecology supporters are by
non-supporters identified with "dysanthroposic" views expressing
hostility toward human beings. But the picture is complicated, because
the supporters are also regularly criticized for having untenable,
"romantic" views about Native Americans and many of their cultures. Some
supporters enjoy saying "Back to pleistocene!" pointing at ecologically
sustainable earlier phases of human history. It is therefore misleading
to consider these supporters hostile towards human beings in general or
the species homo sapiens.

Extended care towards nonhumans invites the criticism that it implies
less care of humans. This is so because care is somehow considered to be
in a kind of bottle. If you spend more of the content of the bottle on
nonhumans, less is left for the humans. Against this I, of course, hold
that caring may be extended in many new ways without lessening care in
the old ways. Applied to human beings it means that they need not be
less cared for by extending care to nonhumans. There is said to be about
2000 organizations promoting the rights of man. Their existence is not
threatened by the comparatively few and poor organizations in favor of
extending rights to living beings in general. Even if they get stronger
I predict that people who care for living beings in general will turn
out mostly to be people who wish that people to be taken better care of.
There are people living in extreme need of care, on the verge of dying
of hunger or of distintegrating from
