1999AF

Orton on the imperfection of Deep Ecology Theory

Arne Naess

I have highly appreciated Green Web Bulletin #52 ( and #56), but I wish
to add some words to David Ortonâ€™s article "Deep Ecology Lessions".

According to David Rothenberg in Is It Painful To Think? I have said
something strange about human cultures. It was my unexpressed optimism
that a "whole human culture" cannot be rescued from extinction through
the extinction of one or several animal species. The issue was mainly
discussed in relation to the effort to totally eradicate the tze-tze
mosquito. Human beings need not completely exterminate any species of
bacteria, but some of them should be kept alive under controlled
conditions. If we really could only prevent an African culture from
disappearing through extinction of one species, I would personally join
those in favor of the extinction.

The noun "sustainability" used in isolation is largely discredited, but
with an adjective attached the case is different. I find the expression
"ecological sustainability" useful, but certainly not "sustainable
development". Those terms have generated into terms used by people who
still favor economic growth of the rich countries. Industrial societies
are, in my view, incompatible with deep ecology, but not industry. I
guess most supporters of the deep ecology movement feel that way.

  By 1985, after moving to Nova Scotia in 1979, I was advocating,
  popularizing, and applying deep ecology to various environmental
  issues - and trying to balance this with social justice concerns. How
  can we organize a society which does not exploit the environment and
  each other? I was also using this philosophy which I and others are
  calling "left biocentrism" or "left ecocentrism" (there are other
  names), to help define a new relationship to the Left. The essential
  Left question seemed to be, can socialism make "a more appropriate and
  more morally defensible relationship between humans and the
  ecosphere?" (Green Web Bulletin #52, p.3).

In any ecosophy - a general view in part influenced by the concern about
the ecological crisis - problems of social justice should have, or must
have, a prominent place. In Europe the socialist labor movement has an
extremely important history, and kinds of socialism is, and hopefully
will continue to be, an important factor. In Norway a socialist party
courageously adopted a green posture, but, as could be expected, did not
increase its voters. It is time not to add a fourth branch of
environmentalism. Deep ecology, ecofeminism, social ecology and
socialist ecology. Attempts to engage in fierce disputes I expect will
not ruin the obvious, large areas of cooperation.

The deep ecology movement as characterized by me in 1973 was too
specific to be of social and political import. My intention was to
articulate what thousands, even in a small country like Norway, might
need to get articulated. The term is now broadened, but not more vague,
as far as I can understand.

In theoretical questions of politics and economics, theorists of the
deep ecology movement largely rely on the Green (Note Capital G)
economists and political theorists. The prevailing attitude is not only
favorable to democracy but also to consistent nonviolent comflict
resolution. The influence of Kropotkin and other anarchists with a
nonviolent attitude has been very strong, and is still quite clear. But
not to the exclusion of central democratic institutions.

All deep ecology theorists are active in the political life, but we have
no one using the terminology of the movement who regularly publishes
their stand in relation to concrete political questions.

Both Green Web Bulletin #52 and #56 offer views that should be carefully
considered by "deep ecology supporters". And I seriously think that
socialist environmentalists are supporters of the deep ecology movement,
whether they personally like the terminology or not.
