2000Z

Poor People and Deep Ecology

Arne Naess

Some people (who are not poor) believe that poor people conentrate to
such an extent on questions of how to keep alive and get basic needs
satisfied that they scarcely worry about biodiversity, and the possible
inherent value of other living beings. I shall here mention a remarkable
case of poor people’s respect for the life even of scorpions and snakes.

Mahatma Gandhi sometimes places his religious centers in the vast Indian
jungle. People were sleeping there, living in small huts. Western
visitors brought with them medicines in case of being hurt by dangerous
animals and, as a matter of course, shut the door in the evenings in
spite of the resulting overheating and bad air. They had good reasons to
expect that otherwise ”dangerous” animals would enter. Gandhi asked them
not to bring medicines and keep doors open. Snakes and scorpions might
enter but would not attack. It was important, he said, just to walk
carefully over the floor in the mornings and inspect one’s slippers,
there might be scorpions enjoying themselves there. ”These kinds of
animals were here before we humans came here.” The mostly rather poor
people listening seemed to understand and agree. To the Western visitors
the situation looked otherwise, and the argumentation doubtful. They
sometimes hid their medicines. In short, the inherent value of living
beings seemed to be acknowledged, and also wide protection of their
habitats.

Another example: The Amazonian jungle except a small part of it was
populated before the invasion of agriculturists. Fairly poor people were
living there, finding a livelihood with cutting the trees. They enjoyed
positive relations with the trees, making use of what they could offer
without killing them. When the government sent people to introduce
agriculture, resistance from the population was fierce, but to no avail.

The supporters of the so-called deep ecology movement are people in many
countries who are in part
