Deep Ecology

The term 'deep ecology' is used sometimes for a kind of philosophy, or,
better, total view, an 'ecosophy', in part inspired by the global
ecological crisis. It is also used as a shorthand for 'the deep ecology
movement' as contrasted with what is called the 'shallow' or 'reform'
movement.

The supporters of the deep ecology movement share the view that every
living being has intrinsic or inherent value or worth independently of
any narrow usefulness for humans. They accordingly tend to oppose
degradation or destruction of nature except to satisfy vital needs
(which may to some extent be different in different regions of the
world.) In this they take an ethical long range view of the future of
the ecosystems of the Earth.

They furthermore believe that the ecological crisis cannot be overcome
without significant changes in all aspects of social life, including
average lifestyles at least in the rich countries. Lastly, they have in
common that their kind of belief has a philosophical or religious basis,
and accordingly an urge to contribute personally, however modestly, to
the solution of the vast problems ahead. In short, a tendency to
activism in a broad sense.

The supporters oppose the position that we don't have any responsibility
for the life quality of future generations of humans and other kinds of
living beings. Because of the loss of life quality to be expected from
further increase of the global human population, policies should have
that in view. Most supporters consider a smaller future human population
to be desirable for humans, and very desirable for most non-human living
beings. Ethically acceptable policies of slow decrease are such that the
process must be expected to take centuries.

The supporters of the shallow or reform ecological movement do not
accept one or more of the beliefs characteristic of the deep movement.
For instance they find it to be unnecessary or even a blind alley to
take up philosophical or religious questions in order to find and
formulate ways of overcoming the ecological crisis. Consequently their
total argumentation pattern does not include derivations from deep
philosophical or religious premisses. Or they don't think it necessary
to problematize the economic system, the high standard of living in the
rich countries, but tend to concentrate on investment in science and
technology. Supporters of the deep movement point to the difficulties
met politically when new technology is supposed to be utilized on a
gigantic scale.

If we add 'long range, international' to the designation 'deep ecology
movement', clearly it started in the early 60s. Rachel Carson's Silent
Spring started an avalanche of discussions covering all relevant
aspects, from the

philosophical and religious to the many practical issues related to the
use of pesticides.

The movement crossed the Atlantic. In Europe it joined the peace and
social justice movements, creating the first wave of the 'green
movement'. To a larger extent than in the United States, Canada and
Australia, focus was directed towards deep political changes as
necessary to overcome the ecological crisis. In Eastern Europe groups
supporting the deep movement were formed, but found that their message
was interpreted as hostile to industrial development, and banned. In the
Third World, the movement made headway, but as must be expected, long
term ecological sustainability as a great goal must compete with that of
short term economic progress.

Along the near periphery of the deep ecology movement we find groups who
practically only focus on the necessity of deep social changes. Some of
them use the term 'social ecology'. Furthermore groups who focus largely
on the spiritual change necessary, that is, human basic attitudes
towards nature. Thirdly there are groups who emphasize on the
non-interference with the ecosystems of the planet, and who talk as if
they considered the fate of humanity a minor concern. Also in relation
to the first two non-typical groups of supporters, it seems that their
differences have more to do with ways of talking and of formulating
priorities than with more substantial disagreements.

The ecological sustainability envisaged by supporters of the deep
ecology movement is that of long range, global conservation of the
richness and diversity of life forms on Earth. Not only biological
organisms are considered to be life forms, but also river systems, types
of landscapes, and other complex structures. Accordingly, reforestation
is not taken to be identical with the establishment of large areas of
tree plantations. These may have much less than half of the biodiversity
of a real forest and are inferior in many other ecological ways.

The gigantic tasks ahead require that firm supporters of the deep and
the reform ecology movements cooperate. The former may sometimes be lost
in visions of a better, green, world, the latter may be too absorbed in
ad hoc, short range, solutions of a highly practical kind. The former
are on the whole more willing to suffer major inconveniences, lower
standard of living, higher prices on non-vital products and services,
and are more liable to criticize the rich countries. The latter are more
'pragmatic' - able to adjust to what is at the moment politically
realizable, and able to avoid some of the crises likely to occur if too
big steps in the direction of ecologically responsible policies are
forced upon an unprepared population.

Bioethical considerations enter the deep ecology movement in the form of
environmental ethics, ethics expanded to comprising the biosphere and
its health, discussed for instance, in a periodical of the same name.
'Rich life,

simple means' as a guideline suggests strengthening preventive medicine
and down-playing the resource and energy intensive technically
'advanced' medicine. One the whole the supporters of the deep ecology
movement tend to widen the responsbilities of humans, including
responsibilities in relation to future generations not only of humans,
but of other living beings and their habitats.

Selected Reading

A. Systematic

Devall, Bill & George Sessions, Deep Ecology, Salt Lake City: Gibbs
M.Smith, 1985

Naess,Arne, Ecology, Community and Lifestyle, Cambridge University
Press, 1989

Snyder, Gary, Turtle Island, New York:New Directions, 1974

The Trumpeter. Journal of Ecosophy,P.O.Box 5853 Stn B, Victoria, B.C.
Canada V8R 6S8

Kval√∏y,Sigmund, "Ecophilosophy and Ecopolitics: thinking and acting in
response to the threats of ecocatastrophe", North American Review, 1974

Porritt,Jonathan, Seeing Green: The Politics of Ecology, Explained,
Oxford: Blackwell, 1984

B. Historical

Pepper,David, The Roots of Modern Environmentalism, London: Croom Helm,
1984

Leopold, Aldo,A Sand County Almanac,Oxford:Oxford University Press, 1949

Fox,Stephen, John Muir and his Legacy: The American Conservation
Movement, Boston: Little, Brown, 1981

Fox,Warwick,Towards a Transpersonal Ecology,Shambhala:Boston & London,
1990

Arne Naess

27.12.91
